1. J Neurochem. 2020 Aug;154(4):354-371. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15002. Epub 2020 Apr
16.

Autophagy in neurodegeneration: New insights underpinning therapy for 
neurological diseases.

Corti O(1)(2)(3)(4), Blomgren K(5)(6), Poletti A(7), Beart PM(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Paris, France.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France.
(4)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(7)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Centro di Eccellenza 
sulle Malattie Neurodegenerative, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, 
Italy.
(8)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Vic, Australia.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, 
Australia.

In autophagy long-lived proteins, protein aggregates or damaged organelles are 
engulfed by vesicles called autophagosomes prior to lysosomal degradation. 
Autophagy dysfunction is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative diseases in 
which misfolded proteins or dysfunctional mitochondria accumulate. Excessive 
autophagy can also exacerbate brain injury under certain conditions. In this 
review, we provide specific examples to illustrate the critical role played by 
autophagy in pathological conditions affecting the brain and discuss potential 
therapeutic implications. We show how a singular type of autophagy-dependent 
cell death termed autosis has attracted attention as a promising target for 
improving outcomes in perinatal asphyxia and hypoxic-ischaemic injury to the 
immature brain. We provide evidence that autophagy inhibition may be protective 
against radiotherapy-induced damage to the young brain. We describe a 
specialized form of macroautophagy of therapeutic relevance for motoneuron and 
neuromuscular diseases, known as chaperone-assisted selective autophagy, in 
which heat shock protein B8 is used to deliver aberrant proteins to 
autophagosomes. We summarize studies pinpointing mitophagy mediated by the 
serine/threonine kinase PINK1 and the ubiquitin-protein ligase Parkin as a 
mechanism potentially relevant to Parkinson's disease, despite debate over the 
physiological conditions in which it is activated in organisms. Finally, with 
the example of the autophagy-inducing agent rilmenidine and its discrepant 
effects in cell culture and mouse models of motor neuron disorders, we 
illustrate the importance of considering aspects such a disease stage and 
aggressiveness, type of insult and load of damaged or toxic cellular components, 
when choosing the appropriate drug, timepoint and duration of treatment.

© 2020 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15002
PMID: 32149395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
