1. Aging Cell. 2023 Feb;22(2):e13774. doi: 10.1111/acel.13774. Epub 2023 Jan 20.

Rilmenidine extends lifespan and healthspan in Caenorhabditis elegans via a 
nischarin I1-imidazoline receptor.

Bennett DF(1), Goyala A(2), Statzer C(2), Beckett CW(1), Tyshkovskiy A(3)(4), 
Gladyshev VN(3), Ewald CY(2), de Magalhães JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Genomics of Ageing Group, Institute of Ageing and Chronic 
Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Laboratory of Extracellular 
Matrix Regeneration, Institute of Translational Medicine, ETH Zürich, 
Schwerzenbach, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow State University, 
Moscow, Russia.

Repurposing drugs capable of extending lifespan and health span has a huge 
untapped potential in translational geroscience. Here, we searched for known 
compounds that elicit a similar gene expression signature to caloric restriction 
and identified rilmenidine, an I1-imidazoline receptor agonist and prescription 
medication for the treatment of hypertension. We then show that treating 
Caenorhabditis elegans with rilmenidine at young and older ages increases 
lifespan. We also demonstrate that the stress-resilience, health span, and 
lifespan benefits of rilmenidine treatment in C. elegans are mediated by the 
I1-imidazoline receptor nish-1, implicating this receptor as a potential 
longevity target. Consistent with the shared caloric-restriction-mimicking gene 
signature, supplementing rilmenidine to calorically restricted C. elegans, 
genetic reduction of TORC1 function, or rapamycin treatment did not further 
increase lifespan. The rilmenidine-induced longevity required the transcription 
factors FOXO/DAF-16 and NRF1,2,3/SKN-1. Furthermore, we find that autophagy, but 
not AMPK signaling, was needed for rilmenidine-induced longevity. Moreover, 
transcriptional changes similar to caloric restriction were observed in liver 
and kidney tissues in mice treated with rilmenidine. Together, these results 
reveal a geroprotective and potential caloric restriction mimetic effect by 
rilmenidine that warrant fresh lines of inquiry into this compound.

© 2023 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13774
PMCID: PMC9924948
PMID: 36670049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JPM is an advisor/consultant for the Longevity 
Vision Fund, NOVOS, YouthBio Therapeutics, and the founder of Magellan Science 
Ltd, a company providing consulting services in longevity science. CYE is a 
co‐founder of AVEA Life AG and an advisor for Maximon AG Longevity Startup 
builder. The other authors have no competing interests to declare. 
Correspondence should be addressed to CYE and JPdM.
