1. Defects of Thyroid Hormone Transport in Serum.

Refetoff S(1).

In: Feingold KR(2), Anawalt B(3), Blackman MR(4), Boyce A(5), Chrousos G(6), 
Corpas E(7), de Herder WW(8), Dhatariya K(9), Dungan K(10), Hofland J(11), Kalra 
S(12), Kaltsas G(13), Kapoor N(14), Koch C(15), Kopp P(16), Korbonits M(17), 
Kovacs CS(18), Kuohung W(19), Laferrère B(20), Levy M(21), McGee EA(22), 
McLachlan R(23), New M(24), Purnell J(25), Sahay R(26), Shah AS(27), Singer 
F(28), Sperling MA(29), Stratakis CA(30), Trence DL(31), Wilson DP(32), editors. 
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2023 Mar 4.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics and Committees on Genetics, The 
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637-1470
(2)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(3)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(4)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(5)Pediatric Endocrinologist and Associate Research Physician in the Skeletal 
Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health
(6)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(7)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(8)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(9)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(10)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(11)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(12)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(13)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(14)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(15)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(16)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(17)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(18)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(19)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(20)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(21)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(22)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(23)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(24)Professor of Pediatrics, Professor of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and 
Chief of the Adrenal Steroid Disorders Program, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
(25)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(26)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(27)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(28)Director of the Endocrine/Bone Disease Program, Saint Johns Cancer Institute 
at Saint John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; Clinical Professor of Medicine, 
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
(29)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(30)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(31)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(32)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

Inherited abnormalities of thyroid hormone-binding proteins are not uncommon and 
can predominate in some ethnic groups. They alter the number of iodothyronines 
present in serum and, although the concentration of free hormones remains 
unaltered, routine measurement can give erroneous results. With a single 
exception, inherited defects in thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), are 
X-chromosome linked and thus, the full phenotype is expressed mostly in males. 
Partial TBG deficiency is more common than complete deficiency. High frequency 
of variants TBGs have been identified in African Blacks, Australian Aborigine, 
and Eskimos. Most defects producing TBG deficiency are caused by mutations in 
the structural gene. However, inherited X-linked partial deficiency can occur as 
the consequence of mutations of a gene enhancer. Inherited forms of TBG excess 
are all caused by gene duplication or triplication. Mutations in the 
transthyretin (TTR) gene producing a molecule with increased affinity for T4 are 
relatively rare. A variant TTR produces transient hyperthyroxinemia during 
non-thyroidal illness. Mutations of the human serum albumin (HSA) gene produce 
increased concentration of serum T4, a condition known as familial 
dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia (FDH). They are relatively more common in 
individuals of Hispanic origin. They cause an increase in serum T4 owing to 
increased affinity for this iodothyronine but high concentrations in free T4 
observed in direct measurement by some commercial methods are erroneous. A 
variant with increased affinity for T3 has been also identified. For complete 
coverage of all related areas of Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE 
web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2023, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 25905418
