1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Jan 26;78(1):151-157. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac162.

Associations of Bioavailable Serum Testosterone With Cognitive Function in Older 
Men: Results From the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.

Giannos P(1)(2), Prokopidis K(2)(3), Church DD(4), Kirk B(5)(6), Morgan 
PT(7)(8), Lochlainn MN(9), Macpherson H(10)(11), Woods DR(12)(13), Ispoglou 
T(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(2)Society of Meta-research and Biomedical Innovation, London, UK.
(3)Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Life Course and Medical 
Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Donald W. Reynolds Institute on Aging, Center for 
Translational Research in Aging and Longevity, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine-Western Health, Melbourne Medical School, University 
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Australian Institute for Musculoskeletal Science (AIMSS), University of 
Melbourne and Western Health, St. Albans, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(8)Department of Sport and Exercise Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan 
University, Manchester, UK.
(9)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(10)Deakin University, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition (IPAN), School of Exercise and 
Nutrition Sciences, Burwood, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Defence Medical Services, Lichfield, UK.
(13)Carnegie School of Sport, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: Age-associated cognitive decline may be influenced by testosterone 
status. However, studies evaluating the impact of bioavailable testosterone, the 
active, free testosterone, on cognitive function are scarce. Our study 
determined the relationship between calculated bioavailable testosterone and 
cognitive performance in older men.
METHODS: We used data from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES) between 2013 and 2014. This study consisted of 208 men aged ≥60 
years. Bioavailable serum testosterone was calculated based on the total serum 
testosterone, sex hormone-binding globulin, and albumin levels, whereas 
cognitive performance was assessed through the Consortium to Establish a 
Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) Word List Learning Test (WLLT), Word 
List Recall Test (WLRT), and Intrusion Word Count Test (WLLT-IC and WLRT-IC), 
the Animal Fluency Test (AFT), and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST). 
Multiple linear regression analyses were performed upon adjustment for age, 
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, education level, medical history, body mass 
index, energy, alcohol intake, physical activity levels, and sleep duration.
RESULTS: A significant positive association between bioavailable testosterone 
and DSST (β: 0.049, p = .002) score was detected, with no signs of a plateau 
effect. No significant associations with CERAD WLLT (p = .132), WLRT (p = .643), 
WLLT-IC (p = .979), and WLRT-IC (p = .387), and AFT (p = .057) were observed.
CONCLUSION: Calculated bioavailable testosterone presented a significant 
positive association with processing speed, sustained attention, and working 
memory in older men above 60 years of age. Further research is warranted to 
elucidate the impact of the inevitable age-related decline in testosterone on 
cognitive function in older men.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac162
PMCID: PMC9879757
PMID: 35927217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
