1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2023 Jan 19;26(1):42-51. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyac069.

Association Between Inflammatory Cytokines, Executive Function, and Substance 
Use in Patients With Opioid Use Disorder and Amphetamine-Type Stimulants Use 
Disorder.

Wang TY(1), Lu RB(1)(2), Lee SY(3), Chang YH(4)(5)(6), Chen SL(1)(5)(7)(8), Tsai 
TY(1), Tseng HH(1)(5), Chen PS(1)(5)(7)(8), Chen KC(1)(5)(7)(8), Yang 
YK(1)(5)(9), Hong JS(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)YiNing Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Gerontology.
(5)Institute of Behavioral Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Genomics and Bioinformatics, College of Life Sciences, National 
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Lipid Science and Aging Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(10)Neurobiology Laboratory, NIH/NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term opioid and amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) abuse may 
affect immunological function and impair executive function. We aimed to 
determine whether biomarkers of inflammation and executive function were 
associated with substance use in individuals with opioid use disorder (OUD) and 
ATS use disorder (ATSUD). The interactions between these biomarkers were also 
explored.
METHODS: We assessed plasma cytokines [tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, C-reactive 
protein (CRP), interleukin (IL)-8, IL-6, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1, 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and executive function in terms of the 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) and Continuous Performance Test (CPT) in OUD 
and ATSUD patients and healthy controls (HC). OUD and ATSUD patients were 
followed for 12 weeks, and their urine morphine and amphetamine tests, cytokine 
levels, and executive function were repeatedly measured.
RESULTS: We enrolled 483 patients and 145 HC. Plasma TNF-α, CRP, IL-8, IL-6, and 
BDNF levels and most subscale scores on the WCST and CPT significantly differed 
between OUD and ATSUD patients and HC. Increased TNF-α levels and more 
perseveration error on the WCST were significantly associated with more urine 
drug-positive results and less abstinence. Plasma IL-6 and CRP levels were 
significantly negatively correlated with WCST and CPT performance.
CONCLUSION: OUD and ATSUD patients had more inflammation and worse executive 
function than HC. Inflammatory markers and WCST performance were associated with 
their urinary drug results, and higher inflammation was associated with poor 
executive function. Studies on regulating the inflammatory process and enhancing 
executive function in OUD and ATSUD are warranted.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyac069
PMCID: PMC9850661
PMID: 36181736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
