1. Cancer Med. 2020 Oct;9(19):7018-7033. doi: 10.1002/cam4.3361. Epub 2020 Aug
11.

Identification of potential prognostic small nucleolar RNA biomarkers for 
predicting overall survival in patients with sarcoma.

Liu J(1), Liao X(2), Zhu X(1), Lv P(1), Li R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Reproductive Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The main purpose of the present study is to screen prognostic small 
nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) markers using the RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) dataset of The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) sarcoma cohort.
METHODS: The sarcoma RNA-seq dataset comes from the TCGA cohort. A total of 257 
sarcoma patients were included into the prognostic analysis. Multiple 
bioinformatics analysis methods for functional annotation of snoRNAs and 
screening of targeted drugs, including biological network gene ontology tool, 
Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Gene Set 
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), and connectivity map (CMap) are used.
RESULTS: We had identified 15 snoRNAs that were significantly related to the 
prognosis of sarcoma and constructed a prognostic signature based on four 
prognostic snoRNA (U3, SNORA73B, SNORD46, and SNORA26) expression values. 
Functional annotation of these four snoRNAs by their co-expression genes 
suggests that some of them were closely related to cell cycle-related biological 
processes and tumor-related signaling pathways, such as Wnt, mitogen-activated 
protein kinase, target of rapamycin, and nuclear factor-kappa B signaling 
pathway. GSEA of the risk score suggests that high risk score phenotype was 
significantly enriched in cell cycle-related biological processes, protein 
SUMOylation, DNA replication, p53 binding, regulation of DNA repair, and DNA 
methylation, as well as Myc, Wnt, RB1, E2F, and TEL pathways. Then we also used 
the CMap online tool to screen five targeted drugs (rilmenidine, pizotifen, 
amiprilose, quipazine, and cinchonidine) for this risk score model in sarcoma.
CONCLUSION: Our study have identified 15 snoRNAs that may be serve as novel 
prognostic biomarkers for sarcoma, and constructed a prognostic signature based 
on four prognostic snoRNA expression values.

© 2020 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.3361
PMCID: PMC7541128
PMID: 32780509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interest exists.
