1. Eur J Med Res. 2023 Feb 3;28(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01017-6.

Association of metformin exposure with low risks of frailty and adverse outcomes 
in patients with diabetes.

Liu P(#)(1), Pan Y(#)(1), Song Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhang W(1), Li X(1), Li J(1), Li 
Y(2), Ma L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Diseases, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Diseases, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. 
liy_xw@sina.com.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Diseases, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. 
malina0883@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is an independent risk factor of frailty, which increases 
adverse outcomes in patients with diabetes. Metformin is a common antidiabetic 
drug in clinical practice. Insulin resistance and chronic inflammation are the 
two common mechanisms of diabetes and frailty, as well as the main targets of 
metformin. Research suggested that metformin has anti-aging potential. However, 
few studies focus on the relationship between metformin and frailty. Thus, we 
aimed to explore whether metformin was associated with a low risk of frailty and 
other adverse outcomes in diabetic patients.
METHODS: A total of 422 patients (≥ 40 years old) with type 2 diabetes were 
recruited. Frailty was defined by the Fried phenotype. General information and 
metformin exposure data were collected, and comprehensive geriatric assessment 
and laboratory tests were performed. Follow-up was conducted after 4.5 years. 
The primary outcome was the combined endpoint of cardiovascular events, 
cerebrovascular events, readmission, and death. Binary logistic regression 
analysis was used to analyze the association of metformin with frailty. Survival 
analysis was performed using Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: The total prevalence of frailty was 19.4% among the participants with 
diabetes. 13.1% of patients in the metformin group and 28.2% in the 
non-metformin group had frailty. Metformin was inversely associated with frailty 
after adjusting for age, sex, duration, blood glucose levels, target organ 
damage, comorbidities, and polypharmacy. Further longitudinal analysis showed 
that metformin was also independently associated with a low risk of combined 
primary outcomes after adjusting for multiple covariables, while frailty was 
related to an increased risk of the combined primary outcomes. In the non-frail 
group, metformin was associated with a decreased risk of combined primary 
outcomes after adjustment for age and sex. However, the protective effect of 
metformin on adverse outcomes was not found in frail participants with diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin use is associated with a reduced risk of frailty. In 
addition, frailty may attenuate the protective effects of metformin on adverse 
outcomes in diabetic patients. The early identification and prevention of 
frailty progression may help enhance the benefits of metformin in patients with 
diabetes.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-023-01017-6
PMCID: PMC9896807
PMID: 36732827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential competing interests.
