1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Jun 16;78(Supplement_1):53-60. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glad034.

Drugs Targeting Mechanisms of Aging to Delay Age-Related Disease and Promote 
Healthspan: Proceedings of a National Institute on Aging Workshop.

Espinoza SE(1)(2), Khosla S(3), Baur JA(4), de Cabo R(5), Musi N(6).

Author information:
(1)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education & Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans Health 
Care System, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Kogod Center on Aging, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(5)Translational Gerontology Branch, Experimental Gerontology Section, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, 
Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The geroscience hypothesis posits that by targeting key hallmarks of aging we 
may simultaneously prevent or delay several age-related diseases and thereby 
increase healthspan, or life span spent free of significant disease and 
disability. Studies are underway to examine several possible pharmacological 
interventions for this purpose. As part of a National Institute on Aging 
workshop on the development of function-promoting therapies, scientific content 
experts provided literature reviews and state-of-the-field assessments for the 
studies of senolytics, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) boosters, and 
metformin. Cellular senescence increases with age, and preclinical studies 
demonstrate that the use of senolytic drugs improves healthspan in rodents. 
Human studies using senolytics are in progress. NAD+ and its phosphorylated 
form, NADP+, play vital roles in metabolism and cellular signaling. Increasing 
NAD+ by supplementation with precursors including nicotinamide riboside and 
nicotinamide mononucleotide appears to extend healthspan in model organisms, but 
human studies are limited and results are mixed. Metformin is a biguanide widely 
used for glucose lowering, which is believed to have pleiotropic effects 
targeting several hallmarks of aging. Preclinical studies suggest it improves 
life span and healthspan, and observational studies suggest benefits for the 
prevention of several age-related diseases. Clinical trials are underway to 
examine metformin for healthspan and frailty prevention. Preclinical and 
emerging clinical studies suggest there is potential to improve healthspan 
through the use of pharmacologic agents reviewed. However, much further research 
is needed to demonstrate benefits and general safety for wider use, the 
appropriate target populations, and longer-term outcomes.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Gerontological Society of 
America 2023.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glad034
PMCID: PMC10272987
PMID: 37325957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
