1. Drugs Aging. 2023 Sep;40(9):751-761. doi: 10.1007/s40266-023-01049-x. Epub
2023  Jul 11.

Management of Type 2 Diabetes in Frail Older Adults.

Bahat G(1), Ozkok S(2), Petrovic M(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Medical 
School, Istanbul University, Capa, 34390, Istanbul, Türkiye. 
gbahatozturk@yahoo.com.
(2)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Hatay Training and 
Research Hospital, 31040, Hatay, Türkiye.
(3)Section of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine and Paediatrics, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Aging is one of the most important factors associated with the dramatic increase 
in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) globally. In addition to 
traditional micro- and macrovascular complications, diabetes mellitus (DM) in 
older adults is of great importance due to its independent relationship with 
frailty, which is defined as a decline in functional reserves and vulnerability 
to stressors. Frailty assessment enables the determination of biological age, 
thus predicting potential complications in older adults and identifying tailored 
treatment strategies. Although the latest guidelines have acknowledged the 
frailty concept and provided recommendations specific to this subgroup of older 
adults, frail older adults are particularly considered only as anorexic, 
malnourished people for whom relaxed treatment targets should be set. However, 
this approach bypasses other metabolic phenotypes in the context of diabetes and 
frailty. Recently, a spectrum of metabolic phenotypes in the context of frailty 
in DM was suggested, and the two edges of this spectrum were defined as 
"anorexic malnourished (AM)" and "sarcopenic obese (SO)." These two edges were 
suggested to require different strategies: Opposite to the AM phenotype 
requiring less stringent targets and de-intensification of treatments, tight 
blood glucose control with agents promoting weight loss was recommended in the 
SO group. Our suggestion is that, regardless of their phenotype, weight loss 
should not be the primary goal in DM management in older adults who are 
overweight or obese, because of the increased malnutrition prevalence in older 
adults suffering from DM compared with standard older adults. Furthermore, 
overweight older adults have been reported to have the lowest risk of mortality 
compared with other groups. On the other hand, obese older individuals may 
benefit from intensive lifestyle interventions including caloric restriction and 
regular exercise with the assurance of at least 1 g/kg/day high-quality protein 
intake. Besides metformin (MF), sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors 
(SGLT-2i) or glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RA) should be 
considered in appropriate SO cases, due to high evidence of cardiorenal 
benefits. MF should be avoided in the AM phenotype due to their weight loss 
property. Although weight loss is not desired in AM phenotype, SGLT-2i may still 
be preferred with close follow-up in certain individuals demonstrating high 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. Of note, SGLT-2i should be considered earlier 
in the diabetes treatment in both groups due to their multiple benefits, i.e., 
organ protective effects, the potential to reduce polypharmacy, and improve 
frailty status. The concept of different metabolic phenotypes in frail older 
adults with diabetes once again shows "one size fits all" cannot be applied in 
geriatric medicine, and a tailored, individualized approach should be adopted to 
get the highest benefit from treatments.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-023-01049-x
PMID: 37434085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
