1. In Vivo. 2023 Sep-Oct;37(5):2105-2127. doi: 10.21873/invivo.13308.

Comparing the Influences of Metformin and Berberine on the Intestinal Microbiota 
of Rats With Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis.

Chen D(1), Xiong J(2), Chen G(3), Zhang Z(1), Liu Y(1), Xu J(1), Xu H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hangzhou Red Cross Hospital, 
Hangzhou, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, Hangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Hangzhou, P.R. China.
(3)Institute of Liver Diseases, Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hangzhou Red Cross Hospital, 
Hangzhou, P.R. China; hongxuhzrc@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND/AIM: High-fat diets induce shifts in the gut microbial community 
structure in patients or animals with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). The 
objective of this study was to investigate the influence of metformin (MET) and 
berberine (BER) on the intestinal microbiota of rats with NASH.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty specific pathogen-free male Sprague-Dawley rats 
were randomized into 4 groups. Model rats were fed high-fat diets to create NASH 
models. MET or BER rats were administrated MET or BER, respectively, at the 
onset of induction of NASH. Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), cholesterol, and triglycerides were examined. Plasma 
endotoxin levels were measured using the turbidimetric endotoxin assay. The 
incidence of bacterial translocation describes the passage of bacteria of the 
gastrointestinal tract through the intestinal mucosa barrier to mesenteric lymph 
nodes and other organs. Hematoxylin and eosin and oil red O staining were used 
for histopathological analysis. High throughput 16S rRNA sequencing was carried 
out for analyzing the composition of intestinal microbiota.
RESULTS: High-fat diets caused NASH after 16-week induction. Administration of 
MET and BER ameliorated NASH by attenuating hepatic steatosis and inflammation 
and decreasing the plasma levels of endotoxin. MET and BER restored the 
composition of the intestinal microbiota disrupted by NASH. Both MET and BER 
altered the abundance of Atopobiaceae, Brevibacterium, Christensenellaceae, 
Coriobacteriales, Papillibacter, Pygmaiobacter, and Rikenellaceae RC9 in rats 
with NASH. The screened intestinal microbiota may be responsible for the 
improvement in fat accumulation and glucose metabolism.
CONCLUSION: MET and BER demonstrated beneficial effects on the intestinal 
microbiota, which was disturbed in NASH. This finding may explain the functional 
mechanism of MET and BER in NASH.

Copyright © 2023, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/invivo.13308
PMCID: PMC10500488
PMID: 37652508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors have no competing interests to 
declare in relation to this study.
