1. Cureus. 2023 Aug 1;15(8):e42786. doi: 10.7759/cureus.42786. eCollection 2023 
Aug.

Inflammatory Bowel Sugar Disease: A Pause From New Pharmacological Agents and an 
Embrace of Natural Therapy.

Mahmoud A(1)(2), Begg M(2), Tarhuni M(2), N Fotso M(2), Gonzalez NA(2), 
Sanivarapu RR(3)(4)(2), Osman U(2)(5), Latha Kumar A(6)(2), Sadagopan A(2), 
Alfonso M(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & 
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(3)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, Odessa, USA.
(4)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Nassau University Medical Center, East 
Meadow, USA.
(5)Geriatrics, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine, East 
Lansing, USA.
(6)Internal Medicine, Spartan Health Sciences University, Vieux Fort, LCA.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), including Crohn's disease and ulcerative 
colitis, are immune-mediated chronic inflammatory diseases that target the 
gastrointestinal tract and other distant organs. The incidence of IBDs has been 
rising and is more prevailing in Western communities. The etiology has been 
vague, but different theories include environmental factors that elicit an 
uncontrolled immune response, which damages internal organs. Treatment of either 
Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis has witnessed significant advances; 
however, pharmacological drugs' side effects limit their use. Research about 
microbiota and its influence on IBDs has gained fame, and multiple studies 
correlate microbiota diversity positively with IBD treatment. Many factors 
contribute to the microbiota's health, including different diets, antibiotics, 
prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics, and postbiotics. Specific immune responses 
lie behind the pathogenesis of IBDs and microbiota dysbiosis, and different 
studies have postulated new ways to control this abnormal response. Physical 
activity, sun exposure, efficient sleep, intermittent fasting, and 
supplementation of probiotics and vitamins are natural ways that help modulate 
this immune response, do not cost money as IBD pharmacological drugs, and do not 
come with deleterious side effects that are sometimes more harmful than IBDs. 
Our article proposes a comprehensive natural approach that can benefit IBD 
patients enormously. This approach does not replace the medications currently 
used in treating IBDs. The suggested approach can be used in combination with 
medications and might aid in reducing the doses of those medications.

Copyright © 2023, Mahmoud et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.42786
PMCID: PMC10469711
PMID: 37664383

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
