1. Pharmacotherapy. 2023 Sep 29. doi: 10.1002/phar.2884. Online ahead of print.

Metabolomic analysis of serum samples from a clinical study on ipragliflozin and 
metformin treatment in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes: Exploring human 
metabolites associated with visceral fat reduction.

Tsukagoshi-Yamaguchi A(1), Koshizaka M(1)(2)(3), Ishibashi R(2)(4), Ishikawa 
K(5), Ishikawa T(1)(6), Shoji M(1)(2), Ide S(1)(2), Ide K(1)(2), Baba Y(1)(2), 
Terayama R(1), Hattori A(1)(2), Takemoto M(7), Ouchi Y(8)(9), Maezawa Y(1)(2), 
Yokote K(1)(2); PRIME-V study group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Chiba University 
Hospital, Chiba City, Japan.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Hematology and Gerontology, Chiba University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba City, Japan.
(3)Center for Preventive Medical Science, Chiba University, Chiba City, Japan.
(4)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Kimitsu Chuo Hospital, 
Kisarazu City, Japan.
(5)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Chiba Rosai Hospital, Ichihara 
City, Japan.
(6)Department of General Medical Science, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chiba City, Japan.
(7)Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, Metabolism and Endocrinology, 
International University of Health and Welfare, Narita City, Japan.
(8)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chiba City, Japan.
(9)Altos Labs, California, San Diego, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: The effects of the sodium-dependent glucose transporter-2 
inhibitor ipragliflozin were compared with metformin in a previous study, which 
revealed that ipragliflozin reduced visceral fat content by 12%; however, the 
underlying mechanism was unclear. Therefore, this sub-analysis aimed to compare 
metabolomic changes associated with ipragliflozin and metformin that may 
contribute to their biological effects.
DESIGN: A sub-analysis of a randomized controlled study.
SETTING: Chiba University Hospital and ten hospitals in Japan.
PATIENTS: Fifteen patients with type 2 diabetes in the ipragliflozin group and 
15 patients with type 2 diabetes in the metformin group with matching 
characteristics, such as age, sex, baseline A1C, baseline visceral fat area, 
smoking status, and concomitant medication.
INTERVENTIONS: Ipragliflozin 50 mg or metformin 1000 mg daily.
MEASUREMENTS: The clinical data were reanalyzed, and metabolomic analysis of 
serum samples collected before and 24 weeks after drug administration was 
performed using capillary electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
MAIN RESULTS: The reduction in the mean visceral fat area after 24 weeks of 
treatment was significantly larger (p = 0.002) in the ipragliflozin group 
(-19.8%) than in the metformin group (-2.5%), as were the subcutaneous fat area 
and body weight. The A1C and blood glucose levels decreased in both groups. 
Glutamic pyruvic oxaloacetic transaminase, γ-glutamyl transferase, uric acid, 
and triglyceride levels decreased in the ipragliflozin group. Low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol levels decreased in the metformin group. After 
ipragliflozin administration, N2-phenylacetylglutamine, inosine, guanosine, and 
1-methyladenosine levels increased, whereas galactosamine, glucosamine, 
11-aminoundecanoic acid, morpholine, and choline levels decreased. After 
metformin administration, metformin, hypotaurine, methionine, 
methyl-2-oxovaleric acid, 3-nitrotyrosine, and cyclohexylamine levels increased, 
whereas citrulline, octanoic acid, indole-3-acetaldehyde, and hexanoic acid 
levels decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolites that may affect visceral fat reduction were detected in 
the ipragliflozin group. Studies are required to further elucidate the 
underlying mechanisms.

© 2023 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.2884
PMID: 37772313
