Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in both men and women with T1DM and T2DM. In patients with T1DM, intensive glycemic control results in a reduction in ASCVD. However, intensive glycemic control does not have a major impact in reducing ASCVD in patients with T2DM. Metformin, pioglitazone, SGLT2 inhibitors, and certain GLP-1 receptor agonists have been shown to decrease major cardiovascular events in patients with T2DM to a greater extent than other treatment modalities. In patients with T2DM other risk factors including, hypertension and dyslipidemia, play a major role in inducing ASCVD and control of these risk factors is paramount. In patients with T1DM in good glycemic control, the lipid profile is very similar to the general population. In contrast, in patients with T2DM, even with good glycemic control, there are frequently lipid abnormalities (elevated TG and non-HDL-C, decreased HDL-C, and an increase in small dense LDL). In both T1DM and T2DM, poor glycemic control increases TG levels and decreases HDL-C levels with modest effects on LDL-C levels. Extensive studies have demonstrated that statins decrease ASCVD in patients with diabetes. Treatment with high doses of potent statins reduces ASCVD events to a greater extent than low dose statin therapy. Adding fibrates or niacin to statin therapy has not been shown to further decrease ASCVD events. In contrast, studies have shown that the combination of a statin and ezetimibe or a statin and a PCSK9 inhibitor result in a greater decrease in ASCVD events than statins alone. Studies have suggested that EPA, an omega-3-fatty acid, when added to statins also reduces ASCVD events but this result is controversial. In statin intolerant patients with T2DM bempedoic acid decreases ASCVD events. Current recommendations state that most patients with diabetes should be on statin therapy. In certain patients with diabetes ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitors, and bempedoic acid can play a role in reducing ASCVD. For complete coverage of all related areas of Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.
