1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 Apr 3;62(4):1436-1444. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keac539.

Type H vessels-a bridge connecting subchondral bone remodelling and articular 
cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis development.

Liu Y(1), Xie HQ(2), Shen B(1).

Author information:
(1)Orthopedics Research Institute, Department of Orthopedics, National Clinical 
Research Center for Geriatrics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Orthopedic Research 
Institute, Med-X Center for Materials, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Recent studies have shed light on the cellular and molecular mechanisms that 
link subchondral bone remodelling and angiogenesis in knee osteoarthritis (OA). 
Type H vessels are a newly identified bone blood vessel characterized by high 
expression of CD31 and endomucin that are coupled with osteogenesis. Factors 
including mechanical loading, TGF-β1, platelet-derived growth factor type BB, 
the osteoprotegerin-RANK ligand-RANK system, osteopontin, mechanistic target of 
rapamycin, VEGF, stromal cell-derived factor l and prostaglandin E2 participate 
in the formation of type H vessels in osteoarthritic subchondral bone. In this 
review, we summarize the current understanding of type H vessels in knee OA, as 
well as the signalling pathways involved and potential therapeutic medicines. In 
future, the pathogenesis of knee OA could be further clarified by connecting 
type H vessels and the design of new disease-modifying osteoarthritis drugs. 
However, further experiments are needed to determine the upstream signals 
regulating type H vessel formation in osteoarthritic subchondral bone.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac539
PMID: 36179083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
