1. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2023 Jan 19;25:e9. doi: 10.1017/erm.2023.2.

Autophagy of na誰ve CD4(+) T cells in aging - the role of body adiposity and 
physical fitness.

Padilha CS(1), Kushkestani M(2), Baptista LP(3)(4)(5), Kr端ger K(6), Lira 
FS(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Exercise and Immunometabolism Research Group, Post-graduation Program in 
Movement Sciences, Department of Physical Education, Universidade Estadual 
Paulista (UNESP), Presidente Prudente, S達o Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Wellness and Lifestyle Science Initiative Group, PhD Student of Kinesiology 
and Health, School of art and science, Rutgers University New Brunswick, New 
Jersey, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gerontology, Geriatrics, and Palliative 
Care Center for Exercise Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, USA.
(4)Research Center in Physical Activity, Health, and Leisure (CIAFEL), Faculty 
of Sports, University of Porto (FADEUP), Portugal.
(5)Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health 
(ITR), Porto, Portugal.
(6)Department of Exercise Physiology and Sports Therapy, Institute of Sports 
Science, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(7)Research Center for Sport and Physical Activity, Faculty of Sports Science 
and Physical Education, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

Life expectancy has increased exponentially in the last century accompanied by 
disability, poor quality of life, and all-cause mortality in older age due to 
the high prevalence of obesity and physical inactivity in older people. 
Biologically, the aging process reduces the cell's metabolic and functional 
efficiency, and disrupts the cell's anabolic and catabolic homeostasis, 
predisposing older people to many dysfunctional conditions such as 
cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, and diabetes. In 
the immune system, aging also alters cells' metabolic and functional efficiency, 
a process known as 'immunosenescence', where cells become more broadly 
inflammatory and their functionality is altered. Notably, autophagy, the 
conserved and important cellular process that maintains the cell's efficiency 
and functional homeostasis may protect the immune system from age-associated 
dysfunctional changes by regulating cell death in activated CD4+ T cells. This 
regulatory process increases the delivery of the dysfunctional cytoplasmic 
material to lysosomal degradation while increasing cytokine production, 
proliferation, and differentiation of CD4+ T cell-mediated immune responses. 
Poor proliferation and diminished responsiveness to cytokines appear to be 
ubiquitous features of aged T cells and may explain the delayed peak in T cell 
expansion and cytotoxic activity commonly observed in the 'immunosenescence' 
phenotype in the elderly. On the other hand, physical exercise stimulates the 
expression of crucial nutrient sensors and inhibits the mechanistic target of 
the rapamycin (mTOR) signaling cascade which increases autophagic activity in 
cells. Therefore, in this perspective review, we will first contextualize the 
overall view of the autophagy process and then, we will discuss how body 
adiposity and physical fitness may counteract autophagy in na誰ve CD4+ T cells in 
aging.

DOI: 10.1017/erm.2023.2
PMID: 36655333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
