1. Phytother Res. 2023 May;37(5):2036-2050. doi: 10.1002/ptr.7735. Epub 2023 Feb
7.

Targeting lipid metabolism with natural products: A novel strategy for 
gastrointestinal cancer therapy.

Guo C(1), Zhang L(2)(3), Zhao M(1), Ai Y(1), Liao W(1), Wan L(1), Liu Q(1), Li 
S(1), Zeng J(4)(5), Ma X(6), Tang J(5).

Author information:
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory Basis of Xinjiang Indigenous Medicinal Plants Resource 
Utilization, Key Laboratory of Plant Resources and Chemistry in Arid Regions, 
Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of geriatrics, Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(5)TCM Regulating Metabolic Diseases Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, 
Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of 
Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.

Gastrointestinal cancer (GIC), including gastric cancer and colorectal cancer, 
is a common malignant tumor originating from gastrointestinal epithelial cells. 
Although the pathogenesis of GIC remains unclear, aberrant lipid metabolism has 
emerged as a hallmark of cancer. Several enzymes, proteins, and transcription 
factors are involved in lipid metabolism reprogramming in GIC, and their 
abnormal expression can promote lipid synthesis and accumulation of lipid 
droplets through numerous mechanisms, thereby affecting the growth, 
proliferation, and metastasis of GIC cells. Studies show that some natural 
compounds, including flavonoids, alkaloids, and saponins, can inhibit the de 
novo synthesis of lipids in GIC, reduce the level of lipid accumulation, and 
subsequently, inhibit the occurrence and development of GIC by regulating Sterol 
regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP-1), adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), 
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt and the mammalian target of rapamycin 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR, amongst other targets and pathways. Therefore, targeting tumor 
lipid metabolism is the focus of anti-gastrointestinal tumor therapy. Although 
most natural products require further high-quality studies to firmly establish 
their clinical efficacy, we review the potential of natural products in the 
treatment of GIC and summarize the application prospect of lipid metabolism as a 
new target for the treatment of GIC, hoping to provide a reference for drug 
development for gastrointestinal tumors.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.7735
PMID: 36748953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
