1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 27;13:1100602. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1100602.
eCollection  2023.

mTOR pathway as a potential therapeutic target for cancer stem cells in canine 
mammary carcinoma.

Michishita M(1)(2), Ochiai K(2)(3), Nakahira R(1), Azakami D(4), Machida Y(1), 
Nagashima T(1), Nakagawa T(5), Ishiwata T(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Nippon 
Veterinary and Life Science University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Veterinary Hygiene, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Nippon 
Veterinary and Life Science University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Veterinary Clinical Oncology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Veterinary Surgery, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Aging and Carcinogenesis, Research Team for Geriatric Pathology, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.

Mammary adenocarcinoma, the most common cancer in female dogs, often exhibits 
the lymph node and lung metastases and has a higher mortality rate. However, 
mammary adenocarcinoma has no established treatment, except early surgical 
excision. Canine mammary carcinoma has many common features with human mammary 
carcinoma, including clinical characteristics, heterogeneity, and genetic 
aberrations, making it an excellent spontaneous tumor model for human breast 
cancer. Diverse cancers comprised heterogeneous cell populations originating 
from cancer stem cells (CSCs) with self-renewal ability. Therefore, in addition 
to conventional therapy, therapeutic strategies targeting CSCs are essential for 
cancer eradication. The present study aimed to extract inhibitors of canine 
mammary CSCs that suppress their self-renewal ability. Sphere-formation assay, 
which evaluates self-renewal ability, was performed for the canine mammary 
cancer cell lines CTBp and CNMp. The spheres formed in this assay were used in 
inhibitor library screening, which identified various signaling pathways such as 
proteosome, stress inducer, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). The 
present study focused on the mTOR signaling pathway. Western blotting showed 
higher levels of phosphorylated mTOR in sphere-forming CTBp and CNMp cells than 
in adherent cells. Drug sensitivity examination using the mTOR inhibitors 
everolimus and temsirolimus revealed dose-dependent reductions in viability 
among both sphere-forming cells and adherent cells. Expression of phosphorylated 
mTOR in adherent and sphere-forming cells decreased by everolimus and 
temsirolimus treatment. In mice transplanted with CTBp-derived spheres, 
everolimus treatment significantly decreased tumor volume compared to control. 
These results reveal that the mTOR signaling pathway may be a potential to be a 
therapeutic target in both cancer cells and CSCs. Novel therapeutic strategies 
for canine mammary carcinoma are expected to benefit to human breast carcinoma 
as well.

Copyright © 2023 Michishita, Ochiai, Nakahira, Azakami, Machida, Nagashima, 
Nakagawa and Ishiwata.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1100602
PMCID: PMC9931192
PMID: 36816969

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
