1. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2023 Jul;29(7):1762-1775. doi: 10.1111/cns.14133. Epub 2023
 Mar 8.

Inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 in the brain microvascular 
endothelium ameliorates diabetic Aβ brain deposition and cognitive impairment 
via the sterol-regulatory element-binding protein 1/lipoprotein 
receptor-associated protein 1 signaling pathway.

Jiang G(1), Long Z(2), Wang Y(1), Wang Y(3), Xue P(4), Chen M(1), Yang K(1), Li 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Xiang Yang No. 1 People Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Hubei University 
Medicine, XiangYang, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Li-Yuan Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

AIMS: Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is highly activated in 
diabetes, and the decrease of low-density lipoprotein receptor-associated 
protein 1 (LRP1) in brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs) is a key 
factor leading to amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition in the brain and diabetic cognitive 
impairment, but the relationship between them is still unknown.
METHODS: In vitro, BMECs were cultured with high glucose, and the activation of 
mTORC1 and sterol-regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1) was observed. 
mTORC1 was inhibited by rapamycin and small interfering RNA (siRNA) in BMECs. 
Betulin and siRNA inhibited SREBP1, observed the mechanism of mTORC1-mediated 
effects on Aβ efflux in BMECs through LRP1 under high-glucose conditions. 
Constructed cerebrovascular endothelial cell-specific Raptor-knockout 
(Raptorfl/+ ) mice to investigate the role of mTORC1 in regulating LRP1-mediated 
Aβ efflux and diabetic cognitive impairment at the tissue level.
RESULTS: mTORC1 activation was observed in HBMECs cultured in high glucose, and 
this change was confirmed in diabetic mice. Inhibiting mTORC1 corrected the 
reduction in Aβ efflux under high-glucose stimulation. In addition, high glucose 
activated the expression of SREBP1, and inhibiting of mTORC1 reduced the 
activation and expression of SREBP1. After inhibiting the activity of SREBP1, 
the presentation of LRP1 was improved, and the decrease of Aβ efflux mediated by 
high glucose was corrected. Raptorfl/+ diabetic mice had significantly inhibited 
activation of mTORC1 and SREBP1, increased LRP1 expression, increased Aβ efflux, 
and improved cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSION: Inhibiting mTORC1 in the brain microvascular endothelium ameliorates 
diabetic Aβ brain deposition and cognitive impairment via the SREBP1/LRP1 
signaling pathway, suggesting that mTORC1 may be a potential target for the 
treatment of diabetic cognitive impairment.

© 2023 The Authors. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.14133
PMCID: PMC10324353
PMID: 36890627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.
