1. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2023 Aug;37(8):e23379. doi: 10.1002/jbt.23379. Epub
2023  Apr 26.

Ox-LDL aggravates contrast-induced injury of renal tubular epithelial cells.

Yang D(1), Yang X(2), Chen S(1), Lv M(3), Tan J(4), Yang D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Tianjin Hospital of Tianjin University, Tianjin, 
China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, 
China.
(3)Clinical College of Orthopedics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin Geriatrics Institute, Tianjin, China.

Hypercholesterolemia can aggravate contrast-induced acute kidney injury, and the 
exacerbation of renal tubular epithelial cell (RTEC) injury is a major cause. 
However, the exact mechanisms remain obscure. Mitophagy, a type of autophagy, 
selectively eliminates damaged mitochondria and reduces mitochondrial oxidative 
stress, which is strongly implicated in cell homeostasis and acute kidney 
injury. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (Ox-LDL) is accumulated in 
hypercholesterolemia and has a cytotoxic effect. This study aimed to determine 
whether and how ox-LDL exacerbates contrast-induced injury in RTECs and to 
further explore whether PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy is involved in this 
process. Iohexol and ox-LDL were used alone or in combination to treat HK-2 
cells. Rapamycin pretreatment was utilized to enhance mitophagy. Cell viability, 
apoptosis, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and mitochondrial reactive 
oxygen species (mtROS) were detected by cell counting kit-8, TUNEL staining, 
JC-1 kit and MitoSOX fluorescence, respectively. The expression of 
mitophagy-related proteins (including PINK1, Parkin, and so on) and cleaved 
caspase-3 was confirmed by western blot. Colocalization of MitoTracker-labeled 
mitochondria and LysoTracker-labeled lysosomes was observed by fluorescence 
microscopy to evaluate mitophagy. The results of our study showed that ox-LDL 
aggravated MMP decline, mtROS release and apoptosis in iohexol-treated HK-2 
cells, accompanied by a further increased autophagy level. Enhancement of 
PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy by rapamycin alleviated apoptosis and 
mitochondrial injury in HK-2 cells in response to iohexol under ox-LDL 
condition. Therefore, our findings indicate that ox-LDL aggravates 
contrast-induced injury of RTECs by increasing mitochondrial damage and 
mitochondrial oxidative stress, which may be associated with the relative 
insufficiency of PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Biochemical and Molecular Toxicology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jbt.23379
PMID: 37186061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
