1. Elife. 2023 Aug 22;12:e82210. doi: 10.7554/eLife.82210.

Ether lipid biosynthesis promotes lifespan extension and enables diverse 
pro-longevity paradigms in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Cedillo L(#)(1)(2)(3), Ahsan FM(#)(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2), Stuhr NL(4), Zhou 
Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Adedoja A(1)(2)(3), Murphy LM(1)(2)(3), Yerevanian 
A(1)(2), Emans S(1)(2), Dao K(5), Li Z(6), Peterson ND(7), Watrous J(5), Jain 
M(5), Das S(6), Pukkila-Worley R(7), Curran SP(4), Soukas AA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine and Diabetes Unit, Endocrine Division, Department 
of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
United States.
(2)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, United States.
(3)Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Medical Sciences, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(4)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, United States.
(5)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, 
San Diego, United States.
(6)Biomedical Informatics Core, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical Schoo, Cambridge, United States.
(7)Program in Innate Immunity, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2021.09.02.457410.

Biguanides, including the world's most prescribed drug for type 2 diabetes, 
metformin, not only lower blood sugar, but also promote longevity in preclinical 
models. Epidemiologic studies in humans parallel these findings, indicating 
favorable effects of metformin on longevity and on reducing the incidence and 
morbidity associated with aging-related diseases. Despite this promise, the full 
spectrum of molecular effectors responsible for these health benefits remains 
elusive. Through unbiased screening in Caenorhabditis elegans, we uncovered a 
role for genes necessary for ether lipid biosynthesis in the favorable effects 
of biguanides. We demonstrate that biguanides prompt lifespan extension by 
stimulating ether lipid biogenesis. Loss of the ether lipid biosynthetic 
machinery also mitigates lifespan extension attributable to dietary restriction, 
target of rapamycin (TOR) inhibition, and mitochondrial electron transport chain 
inhibition. A possible mechanistic explanation for this finding is that ether 
lipids are required for activation of longevity-promoting, metabolic stress 
defenses downstream of the conserved transcription factor skn-1/Nrf. In 
alignment with these findings, overexpression of a single, key, ether lipid 
biosynthetic enzyme, fard-1/FAR1, is sufficient to promote lifespan extension. 
These findings illuminate the ether lipid biosynthetic machinery as a novel 
therapeutic target to promote healthy aging.

Plain Language Summary: Metformin is the drug most prescribed to treat type 2 
diabetes around the world and has been in clinical use since 1950. The drug 
belongs to a family of compounds known as biguanides which reduce blood sugar, 
making them an effective treatment against type 2 diabetes. More recently, 
biguanides have been found to have other health benefits, including limiting the 
growth of various cancer cells and improving the lifespan and long-term health 
of several model organisms. Epidemiologic studies also suggest that metformin 
may increase the lifespan of humans and reduce the incidence of age-related 
illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, cancer and dementia. Given the safety 
and effectiveness of metformin, understanding how it exerts these desirable 
effects may allow scientists to discover new mechanisms to promote healthy 
aging. The roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans is an ideal organism for studying 
the lifespan-extending effects of metformin. It has an average lifespan of two 
weeks, a genome that is relatively easy to manipulate, and a transparent body 
that enables scientists to observe cellular and molecular events in living 
worms. To discover the genes that enable metformin’s lifespan-extending 
properties, Cedillo, Ahsan et al. systematically switched off the expression of 
about 1,000 genes involved in C. elegans metabolism. They then screened for 
genes which impaired the action of biguanides when inactivated. This ultimately 
led to the identification of a set of genes involved in promoting a longer 
lifespan. Cedillo, Ahsan et al. then evaluated how these genes impacted other 
well-described pathways involved in longevity and stress responses. The analysis 
indicated that a biguanide drug called phenformin (which is similar to 
metformin) increases the synthesis of ether lipids, a class of fats that are 
critical components of cellular membranes. Indeed, genetically mutating the 
three major enzymes required for ether lipid production stopped the biguanide 
from extending the worms’ lifespans. Critically, inactivating these genes also 
prevented lifespan extension through other known strategies, such as dietary 
restriction and inhibiting the cellular organelle responsible for producing 
energy. Cedillo, Ahsan et al. also showed that increasing ether lipid production 
alters the activity of a well-known longevity and stress response factor called 
SKN-1, and this change alone is enough to extend the lifespan of worms. These 
findings suggest that promoting the production of ether lipids could lead to 
healthier aging. However, further studies, including clinical trials, will be 
required to determine whether this is a viable approach to promote longevity and 
health in humans.

© 2023, Cedillo, Ahsan et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.82210
PMCID: PMC10444025
PMID: 37606250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LC, FA, SL, NS, YZ, YZ, AA, LM, AY, SE, KD, ZL, 
NP, JW, MJ, SD, RP, SC, AS No competing interests declared
