1. Geroscience. 2023 Aug 31. doi: 10.1007/s11357-023-00917-z. Online ahead of 
print.

Proteomic changes induced by longevity-promoting interventions in mice.

Burns AR(1), Wiedrick J(2), Feryn A(2), Maes M(3), Midha MK(3), Baxter DH(3), 
Morrone SR(3), Prokop TJ(3), Kapil C(3), Hoopmann MR(3), Kusebauch U(3), Deutsch 
EW(3), Rappaport N(3), Watanabe K(3), Moritz RL(3), Miller RA(4), Lapidus JA(5), 
Orwoll ES(6).

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics & Design Program, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
OR, USA. burnsad@ohsu.edu.
(2)Biostatistics & Design Program, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
OR, USA.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Geriatrics Center, University of Michigan School 
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)School of Public Health, Oregon Health & Science University-Portland State 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
OR, USA.

Using mouse models and high-throughput proteomics, we conducted an in-depth 
analysis of the proteome changes induced in response to seven interventions 
known to increase mouse lifespan. This included two genetic mutations, a growth 
hormone receptor knockout (GHRKO mice) and a mutation in the Pit-1 locus (Snell 
dwarf mice), four drug treatments (rapamycin, acarbose, canagliflozin, and 
17α-estradiol), and caloric restriction. Each of the interventions studied 
induced variable changes in the concentrations of proteins across liver, kidney, 
and gastrocnemius muscle tissue samples, with the strongest responses in the 
liver and limited concordance in protein responses across tissues. To the extent 
that these interventions promote longevity through common biological mechanisms, 
we anticipated that proteins associated with longevity could be identified by 
characterizing shared responses across all or multiple interventions. Many of 
the proteome alterations induced by each intervention were distinct, potentially 
implicating a variety of biological pathways as being related to lifespan 
extension. While we found no protein that was affected similarly by every 
intervention, we identified a set of proteins that responded to multiple 
interventions. These proteins were functionally diverse but tended to be 
involved in peroxisomal oxidation and metabolism of fatty acids. These results 
provide candidate proteins and biological mechanisms related to enhancing 
longevity that can inform research on therapeutic approaches to promote healthy 
aging.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to American Aging Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-023-00917-z
PMID: 37653270
