1. Aging Cell. 2023 Nov 28:e14040. doi: 10.1111/acel.14040. Online ahead of
print.

Endothelial cell-specific reduction in mTOR ameliorates age-related arterial and 
metabolic dysfunction.

Islam MT(1), Hall SA(1), Dutson T(2), Bloom SI(1), Bramwell RC(2), Kim J(3), 
Tucker JR(2), Machin DR(2), Donato AJ(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Lesniewski LA(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Integrative Physiology, The University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of 
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, The 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(4)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Veteran's Affairs Medical 
Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
USA.

Systemic inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) delays aging and 
many age-related conditions including arterial and metabolic dysfunction. 
However, the mechanisms and tissues involved in these beneficial effects remain 
largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that activation of S6K, a downstream 
target of mTOR, is increased in arteries with advancing age, and that this 
occurs preferentially in the endothelium compared with the vascular smooth 
muscle. Induced endothelial cell-specific deletion of mTOR reduced protein 
expression by 60-70%. Although this did not significantly alter arterial and 
metabolic function in young mice, endothelial mTOR reduction reversed arterial 
stiffening and improved endothelium-dependent dilation (EDD) in old mice, 
indicating an improvement in age-related arterial dysfunction. Improvement in 
arterial function in old mice was concomitant with reductions in arterial 
cellular senescence, inflammation, and oxidative stress. The reduction in 
endothelial mTOR also improved glucose tolerance in old mice, and this was 
associated with attenuated hepatic gluconeogenesis and improved lipid tolerance, 
but was independent of alterations in peripheral insulin sensitivity, pancreatic 
beta cell function, or fasted plasma lipids in old mice. Lastly, we found that 
endothelial mTOR reduction suppressed gene expression of senescence and 
inflammatory markers in endothelial-rich (i.e., lung) and metabolically active 
organs (i.e., liver and adipose tissue), which may have contributed to the 
improvement in metabolic function in old mice. This is the first evidence 
demonstrating that reducing endothelial mTOR in old age improves arterial and 
metabolic function. These findings have implications for future drug 
development.

© 2023 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.14040
PMID: 38017701
