1. Brain Behav. 2023 Jun;13(6):e2995. doi: 10.1002/brb3.2995. Epub 2023 May 23.

Advances in the mTOR signaling pathway and its inhibitor rapamycin in epilepsy.

Zhao W(1), Xie C(1), Zhang X(1), Liu J(2), Liu J(1)(3)(4)(5), Xia Z(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gerontology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First 
Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Microvascular Medicine, Medical Research Center, Shandong 
Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Liaocheng People's Hospital and Liaocheng Clinical 
School of Shandong First Medical University, Liaocheng, China.
(4)Department of Gerontology, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong Provincial 
Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Geriatric Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong 
First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, 
China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Liaocheng People's 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

INTRODUCTION: Epilepsy is one of the most common and serious brain syndromes and 
has adverse consequences on a patient's neurobiological, cognitive, 
psychological, and social wellbeing, thereby threatening their quality of life. 
Some patients with epilepsy experience poor treatment effects due to the unclear 
pathophysiological mechanisms of the syndrome. Dysregulation of the mammalian 
target of the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is thought to play an important role in 
the onset and progression of some epilepsies.
METHODS: This review summarizes the role of the mTOR signaling pathway in the 
pathogenesis of epilepsy and the prospects for the use of mTOR inhibitors.
RESULTS: The mTOR pathway functions as a vital mediator in epilepsy development 
through diverse mechanisms, indicating that the it has great potential as an 
effective target for epilepsy therapy. The excessive activation of mTOR 
signaling pathway leads to structural changes in neurons, inhibits autophagy, 
exacerbates neuron damage, affects mossy fiber sprouting, enhances neuronal 
excitability, increases neuroinflammation, and is closely associated with tau 
upregulation in epilepsy. A growing number of studies have demonstrated that 
mTOR inhibitors exhibit significant antiepileptic effects in both clinical 
applications and animal models. Specifically, rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of 
TOR, reduces the intensity and frequency of seizures. Clinical studies in 
patients with tuberous sclerosis complex have shown that rapamycin has the 
function of reducing seizures and improving this disease. Everolimus, a 
chemically modified derivative of rapamycin, has been approved as an added 
treatment to other antiepileptic medicines. Further explorations are needed to 
evaluate the therapeutic efficacy and application value of mTOR inhibitors in 
epilepsy.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeting the mTOR signaling pathway provides a promising prospect 
for the treatment of epilepsy.

© 2023 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.2995
PMCID: PMC10275542
PMID: 37221133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.
