1. Adv Dent Res. 2023 Nov;31(1):2-15. doi: 10.1177/08959374231200840.

Geroscience: Aging and Oral Health Research.

Weintraub JA(1), Kaeberlein M(2), Perissinotto C(3), Atchison KA(4), Chen X(5), 
D'Souza RN(6), Feine JS(7), Ghezzi EM(8), Kirkwood KL(9)(10), Ryder M(11), 
Slashcheva LD(12), Touger-Decker R(13), Wu B(14), Kapila Y(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Public Health, Adams School of Dentistry 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Division of Geriatrics, School of Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Section of Public and Population Health, School of Dentistry, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Division of Restorative and Prosthetic Dentistry, College of Dentistry, The 
Ohio State University College of Dentistry, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)NIDCR, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Population Health, Faculty of Dental Medicine and Oral Health Sciences, 
McGill University, Quebec, Canada.
(8)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences & Endodontics, School of 
Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Head & Neck/Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, Roswell Park 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(11)Division of Periodontology, Department of Orofacial Sciences, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(12)Apple Tree Dental, Research Director, Innovations Team, Corporate Office, 
Fergus Falls, MN, USA.
(13)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, School 
of Health Professions, Rutgers State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
(14)Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Biosystems and Function and Periodontics, School of Dentistry, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Research in aging has significantly advanced; scientists are now able to 
identify interventions that slow the biologic aging processes (i.e., the 
"hallmarks of aging"), thus delaying the onset and progression of multiple 
diseases, including oral conditions. Presentations given during the 3-part 
session "Geroscience: Aging and Oral Health Research," held during the 2023 
American Association for Dental, Oral, and Craniofacial Research meeting, are 
summarized in this publication. Speakers' topics spanned the translational 
research spectrum. Session 1 provided an overview of the geroscience and health 
span (disease-free and functional health throughout life) concepts. The common 
molecular mechanisms between oral cancer and aging were discussed, and research 
was presented that showed periodontal microflora as a potential factor in 
Alzheimer's disease progression. Session 2 focused on behavioral and social 
science aspects of aging and their oral health significance. The keynote 
provided evidence that loneliness and isolation can have major health effects. 
These social conditions, along with poor oral health, tooth loss, and cognitive 
decline, could potentially affect healthy eating ability and systemic health in 
older adults. Research could help elucidate the directions and pathways 
connecting these seemingly disparate conditions. Session 3 focused on the 
delivery of oral care in different settings and the many barriers to access care 
faced by older adults. Research is needed to identify and implement effective 
technology and strategies to improve access to dental care, including new 
delivery and financing mechanisms, workforce models, interprofessional provider 
education and practice, and use of big data from medical-dental integration of 
electronic health records. Research to improve the "oral health span," reduce 
oral health disparities, and increase health equity must be tackled at all 
levels from biologic pathways to social determinants of health and health 
policies.

DOI: 10.1177/08959374231200840
PMID: 37933846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: M. Kaeberlein is 
Chief Science Officer at Optispan, a company focused on developing solutions for 
science-based preventative and longevity medicine. Optispan is not currently 
engaged in any oral health or rapamycin-related projects. C. Perissinotto is a 
research consultant to Papa Health. As part of this presentation, M. Ryder 
discussed research and results from several FDA clinical trials that were 
developed, supervised, and supported by the company formerly known as Cortexyme 
Inc/Quince Therapeutics (now Lighthouse Phama). M. Ryder was a former member of 
the Clinical Advisory Board of Cortexyme Inc., where he assisted in the design 
of these studies and preparation of manuscripts, holds stock, and received 
consulting fees. L.D. Slashcheva is an employee of Apple Tree Dental but has no 
financial conflicts of interest in representing the organization.
