1. TARDBP-Related Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Frontotemporal Dementia.

Manohar V(1), Crowley L(1), Sreedharan J(1).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2009 Apr 23 [updated 2023 Jan 5].

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, IoPPN, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: In this GeneReview, TARDBP amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis-frontotemporal dementia (TARDBP-ALS-FTD) refers to the spectrum of 
phenotypes caused by pathogenic variants in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP-43. 
The phenotypic spectrum encompasses pure (i.e., without other neurologic 
findings) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; most common), pure (i.e., without 
other neurologic findings) frontotemporal dementia (FTD; rare), a combination of 
ALS and FTD, and atypical neurologic phenotypes (very rare). Individuals with 
the same TARDBP pathogenic variant (even within the same family) may have 
clinical features that vary in both type and severity. Common manifestations are 
dysarthria and dysphagia; less common manifestations can include parkinsonism, 
cognitive deterioration, and behavioral and psychological manifestations of 
dementia. Life expectancy for TARDBP-ALS is highly variable and mainly 
associated with an individual's clinical features; overall disease duration 
averages three to five years. For TARDBP-FTD, disease duration averages one to 
16 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TARDBP-ALS-FTD is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and most commonly a heterozygous pathogenic (or likely 
pathogenic) variant in TARDBP identified by molecular genetic testing. Rarely, 
homozygous pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variants in TARDBP have been 
reported.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no cure for TARDBP-ALS-FTD. 
Individuals benefit from multidisciplinary supportive care to improve quality of 
life, maximize function, and reduce complications. This can include care by 
specialists in neurology, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech-language 
therapy, nutrition, respiratory therapy, pulmonology, psychology, social work, 
genetic counselling, palliative care, and special nursing. Surveillance: 
Frequent monitoring of existing manifestations, the individual's response to 
supportive care, and the emergence of new manifestations by the treating 
clinicians is recommended.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TARDBP-ALS-FTD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
About half of individuals diagnosed with TARDBP-ALS-FTD have an affected parent. 
Each child of an individual with TARDBP-ALS-FTD has a 50% chance of inheriting 
the TARDBP pathogenic variant. Once a TARDBP pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, predictive testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for the presence of 
the TARDBP pathogenic variant are possible. (Note: Because the clinical 
presentation of TARDBP-ALS-FTD may differ among heterozygous family members, 
accurate prediction of future possible clinical manifestations in an individual 
found to have a familial TARDBP pathogenic variant is not possible.)

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301761
