1. Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome.

Evans DG(1), Farndon PA(2).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2002 Jun 20 [updated 2023 Sep 21].

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, Consultant in Medical Genetics, St Mary's Hospital and Christie 
Hospital, Professor of Medical Genetics and Cancer Epidemiology, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
(2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Consultant Clinical 
Geneticist, West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Professor of Clinical 
Genetics, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is 
characterized by the development of multiple jaw keratocysts, frequently 
beginning in the second decade of life, and/or basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) 
usually from the third decade onward. Approximately 60% of individuals have a 
recognizable appearance with macrocephaly, frontal bossing, coarse facial 
features, and facial milia. Most individuals have skeletal anomalies (e.g., 
bifid ribs, wedge-shaped vertebrae). Ectopic calcification, particularly in the 
falx, is present in more than 90% of affected individuals by age 20 years. 
Cardiac and ovarian fibromas occur in approximately 2% and 20% of individuals 
respectively. Approximately 5% of all children with NBCCS develop 
medulloblastoma (primitive neuroectodermal tumor), generally the desmoplastic 
subtype. The risk of developing medulloblastoma is substantially higher in 
individuals with an SUFU pathogenic variant (33%) than in those with a PTCH1 
pathogenic variant (<2%). Peak incidence is at age one to two years. Life 
expectancy in NBCCS is not significantly different from average.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NBCCS is established in a proband who 
fulfills existing diagnostic clinical criteria. Identification of a heterozygous 
germline pathogenic variant in PTCH1 or SUFU on molecular genetic testing 
establishes the diagnosis if clinical features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Best provided by specialists 
experienced with the condition; keratocysts usually require surgical excision; 
early treatment of BCCs to ensure complete eradication of aggressive BCCs and to 
preserve normal tissue to prevent disfigurement; sonic hedgehog inhibitors such 
as vismodegib to treat severe BCCs; preservation of ovarian tissue whenever 
ovarian fibromas require surgical treatment. However, the cost of treatment has 
meant that the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence in the UK has 
judged the treatment not cost effective. Prevention of primary manifestations: 
Avoidance of direct sun exposure through the use of complete sunblock and 
covering of exposed skin with long sleeves, high collars, and hats. 
Surveillance: Monitoring of head circumference throughout childhood; 
developmental assessment and physical examination every six months in the first 
years of life because of increased risk for medulloblastoma; in those older than 
age eight years, orthopantogram every 12-18 months to identify jaw keratocysts; 
skin examination at least annually. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Radiotherapy 
if there are alternative treatments, especially in childhood; diagnostic x-rays 
should be used sparingly; direct sun exposure should be limited; excessive sun 
exposure increases the likelihood of developing BCCs. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Because of the need for surveillance for complications of NBCCS 
(medulloblastoma in children; jaw cysts and BCCs in adults) and the need to 
avoid sun exposure, clarification of the genetic status of at-risk relatives, 
including children, is appropriate.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NBCCS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Approximately 70%-80% of individuals with NBCCS have an affected parent and 
about 20%-30% have NBCCS as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. The 
offspring of an affected individual are at a 50% risk of inheriting NBCCS. 
Prenatal testing for pregnancies at risk is possible if the PTCH1 or SUFU 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301330
