1. Ataxia-Telangiectasia.

Veenhuis S(1), van Os N(2), Weemaes C(3), Kamsteeg EJ(4), Willemsen M(5).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
1999 Mar 19 [updated 2023 Oct 5].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Children’s Hospital, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
(2)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour;, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
(3)Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour;, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of ataxia-telangiectasia 
(A-T), a multisystem disorder, is a continuum ranging from classic A-T at the 
severe end and variant A-T at the milder end. Nonetheless, distinguishing 
between classic A-T and variant A-T on this spectrum helps understand 
differences in disease course, rate of progression, and life expectancy. Classic 
A-T is characterized by childhood onset of progressive neurologic manifestations 
(initially cerebellar ataxia, followed typically by extrapyramidal involvement 
and peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy), immunodeficiency (variably associated 
with abnormalities of humoral immunity, cellular immunity, or combined immune 
deficiency), pulmonary disease (resulting from recurrent infections, immune 
deficiency, aspiration, interstitial lung disease, and neurologic 
abnormalities), and increased risk of malignancy. Although it is generally 
accepted that intellectual disability is not common in A-T, disturbances in 
cerebellar as well as non-cerebellar brain areas and networks may result in 
cognitive deficits. Increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation (x-ray and gamma 
ray) can result in severe side effects from such treatments. Life expectancy is 
significantly reduced due to cancer, pulmonary disease, and infections. Variant 
A-T has a significantly milder disease course. While cerebellar ataxia can be 
absent, extrapyramidal movement disorders are common (typically dystonia and 
dystonic tremor) and most individuals have manifestations of axonal sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy. In contrast to classic A-T, immune function is generally normal, 
respiratory infections are not increased, and pulmonary disease is not a major 
feature. However, risk of developing malignancies is increased, particularly in 
premenopausal females who have an increased risk of developing breast cancer and 
hematologic malignancies.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of A-T is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in ATM identified by 
molecular genetic testing. Of note, newborn screening (NBS) for severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) that relies on the identification of reduced T-cell 
receptor excision circle (TREC) levels in blood spots most likely identifies 
about 50% of children with classic A-T, who require immediate subspecialty 
evaluation at a center with expertise in the diagnosis of SCID, its causes, and 
its treatment.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive care to improve quality of 
life, maximize function, and reduce complications ideally involves 
multidisciplinary care by specialists in (pediatric) neurology, pulmonology, 
immunology, pediatrics (for children) and internal medicine (for adults), 
rehabilitation medicine, and professionals in physical therapy, speech-language 
therapy, occupational therapy, and nutrition. For specific issues care may be 
provided by specialists in oncology, medical genetics, endocrinology, 
orthopedics, dermatology, mental health, and social work. Surveillance: Routine 
evaluations by treating clinicians is necessary to monitor existing 
manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence 
of new manifestations. Recommended surveillance is the same for individuals with 
classic A-T and variant A-T, with the exception that individuals who do not have 
evidence of lung disease at the time of initial diagnosis do not require annual 
screening for pulmonary disease. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Rubella 
vaccination should be avoided in individuals with severe immunodeficiency as it 
can possibly increase the risk for granulomas; ionizing radiation (x-ray and 
gamma ray) is contraindicated, due to increased sensitivity; and radiation 
therapy is contraindicated because increased radiosensitivity may lead to very 
severe complications. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
offer molecular genetic testing for the familial ATM pathogenic variants to 
apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected 
individual in order to identify as early as possible sibs with biallelic ATM 
pathogenic variants who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment of 
manifestations of A-T, surveillance for malignancy, and awareness of 
agents/circumstances to avoid; and family members who are heterozygous for an 
ATM pathogenic variant and who would benefit from age-appropriate intensified 
surveillance for breast cancer. Therapies under investigation: Use of 
intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone; the effects of nicotinamide riboside (a form of 
vitamin B3) on ataxia scores and immunoglobulin levels; gene therapy with 
antisense oligonucleotides in a single case study; effect of allogenic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation on neurologic functioning.
GENETIC COUNSELING: A-T is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ATM and 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both parents are known to be 
heterozygous for an ATM pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual 
has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and 
having A-T, a 50% chance of inheriting one pathogenic variant and being 
heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial ATM 
pathogenic variants. Although individuals heterozygous for an ATM pathogenic 
variant are not at risk for A-T, their risk of developing cancer is increased 
compared to that of the general population (in particular, heterozygous females 
have an increased risk of developing breast cancer). Once the ATM pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, heterozygote testing 
for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for A-T 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301790
