1. Colon Cancer.

Lotfollahzadeh S(1), Recio-Boiles A(2), Cagir B.

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jun 3.

Author information:
(1)Renal and Vascular Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School 
of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA
(2)University of Arizona

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common diagnosis and second deadliest 
malignancy for both sexes combined. CRC has both strong environmental 
associations and genetic risk factors. The incidence of new cases and mortality 
has been steadily declining for the past years, except for younger adults 
(younger than 50 years), possibly related to an increase in cancer screening and 
better therapy modalities. Approximately 5% of all CRC are attributed to two 
inherited syndromes, Familial Adenomatous Polyposis, and Lynch syndrome.  The 
change of the normal colonic epithelium to a precancerous lesion and ultimately 
an invasive carcinoma requires an accumulation of genetic mutations either 
somatic (acquired) and/or germline (inherited) in an approximately 10 to 15-year 
period. Chromosomal instability, mismatch repair, and CpG hypermethylation are 
the major pathways to CRC. The most important prognostic colon cancer indicator 
is the pathological stage at presentation. All new CRC cases should be 
universally screen for DNA mismatch repair/microsatellite status, and RAS/BRAF 
mutational testing when considering for prognostic and predictive of 
chemotherapy efficacy. In almost all patients, a diagnostic or screening 
colonoscopy is required for tissue biopsy pathological confirmation of colon 
carcinoma. Baseline computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis 
with contrast and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) are the preferred 
cost-effective, colon-cancer staging studies done before surgical resection. 
Surgical resection is the main treatment modality for localized early-stage 
colon cancer. Adjuvant therapy could augment the chance of cure on high-risk 
patients with colon cancer. Oligo-metastatic, liver and lung, and 
local-recurrence patients with colon cancer are potential curable candidates 
with multimodality therapies. Palliative systemic therapy is reserved for 
non-surgical colon cancer candidates aiming to improve quality of life and 
prolong life expectancy.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29262132

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Saran Lotfollahzadeh declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: 
Alejandro Recio-Boiles declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Burt Cagir declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.
