1. Orbital Cellulitis.

Danishyar A(1), Sergent SR(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 8.

Author information:
(1)Midwestern University
(2)Michigan State University College of OM

Orbital cellulitis is defined as a serious infection that involves the muscle 
and fat located within the orbit. It is also sometimes referred to as postseptal 
cellulitis. Orbital cellulitis does not involve the globe itself. Although 
orbital cellulitis can occur at any age, it is more common in the pediatric 
population.The causative organisms of orbital cellulitis are commonly bacterial 
but can also be polymicrobial, often including aerobic and anaerobic bacteria 
and even fungal or mycobacteria. The most common bacterial organisms causing 
orbital cellulitis are Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococci species. Rare 
cases of orbital cellulitis caused by non-spore-forming anaerobes Aeromonas 
hydrophila, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Eikenella corrodens have also been 
reported. Fungal pathogens causing invasive orbital cellulitis include Mucorales 
which causes mucormycosis and Aspergillus which can cause life-threatening 
invasive orbital infections. In immunocompromised patients with orbital 
cellulitis, mucormycosis and invasive aspergillosis should be considered as the 
cause of orbital cellulitis. Mucormycosis affects patients with diabetic 
ketoacidosis as well as the patients with renal acidosis. Aspergillus infection 
of the orbit occurs in patients with severe neutropenia or other immune 
deficiencies, such as HIV infection. Other rare reported cause of orbital 
cellulitis is mycobacteria, especially Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Orbital 
cellulitis is primarily diagnosed clinically by objective findings on physical 
examination combined with presenting signs and symptoms. The most important 
distinguishing feature of orbital cellulitis is the presence of ophthalmoplegia, 
the presence of pain with eye movement, and/or proptosis. Orbital cellulitis 
also typically cause eyelid swelling with or without erythema; however, these 
findings are also seen in another less serious condition called preseptal 
cellulitis.  The diagnosis of orbital cellulitis can be confirmed by imaging 
modalities such as Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI). Due to the controversy surrounding imaging use and the risks of radiation 
exposure to the pediatric population, there are guidelines and recommendation in 
place that highlight the indications and aid in the proper use of imaging for 
diagnosis of orbital cellulitis. Treatment of orbital cellulitis includes 
antibiotics and other supportive therapies. An ophthalmologist and 
otolaryngologist should also be consulted for proper examination and because, in 
some cases, surgery may be required. Without prompt diagnosis and proper 
treatment, the infection of the orbit can progress and extend to the adjacent 
anatomical locations and result in serious complications. Those complications 
include loss of vision, subperiosteal abscess, orbital abscess, and intracranial 
extension of the infection. The choice of antibiotics is broad spectrum regimens 
aimed at covering for organisms such as S. aureus (including 
methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA]), Streptococcus pneumoniae, other 
Streptococci, as well as gram-negative bacilli. The antibiotic regimen should 
also include coverage for anaerobes when an intracranial extension is suspected. 
Antifungals are indicated only when a fungal infection is suspected in the 
appropriate clinical setting. Further details on specific antibiotics will be 
explained in the diagnosis section. Analgesics such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen 
can be used alone or in combination to achieve effective pain control in 
patients with orbital cellulitis.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29939678

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Amina Danishyar declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Shane Sergent 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
