1. Grief Reaction and Prolonged Grief Disorder.

Mughal S, Azhar Y(1), Mahon MM(2), Siddiqui WJ(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Nov 14.

Author information:
(1)Dow University of Health Sciences
(2)National Institutes of Health Clinical Center
(3)Drexel University

Grief is a natural and universal response to the loss of a loved one. The grief 
experience is not a state but a process. Most individuals recover adequately 
within a year after the loss; however, some individuals experience an extension 
of the grieving process. This condition, identified as prolonged grief disorder, 
results from failure to transition from acute to integrated grief. Symptoms of 
acute grief include sadness, tearfulness, and possibly insomnia, and typically 
require no treatment. Prolonged grief disorder involves intense, painful 
emotions associated with a lack of adapting to the loss of a loved one that 
persists for more than 1 year in adults and more than 6 months in adolescents or 
children. This condition is estimated to affect as many as 7% of bereaved 
individuals. The terms grief, mourning, and bereavement have slightly different 
meanings: Grief is a person's emotional response to loss. Mourning is an outward 
expression of that grief, including cultural and religious customs surrounding 
the death. Mourning is also the process of adapting to life after loss. 
Bereavement is a period of grief and mourning after a loss. Anticipatory 
grief is a response to an expected loss. It affects both the person diagnosed 
with a terminal illness as well as their families. Disenfranchised grief, as 
defined by Kenneth Doka (1989), is "grief that persons experience when they 
incur a loss that is not or cannot be openly acknowledged, publicly mourned, or 
socially supported." Some examples could include grief related to the loss of a 
pet, perinatal losses, and loss of a body part, and this condition can be 
present in healthcare workers, with losses in the form of patient deaths. . 
Intense grief can have physical consequences and may trigger the acute onset of 
myocardial infarction, particularly in people with higher baseline 
cardiovascular risk. There is a correlation between complicated grief and acute 
coronary syndrome. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, also called broken heart syndrome 
or stress cardiomyopathy, is another cardiovascular syndrome triggered by 
intense grief. This condition is a weakening of the left ventricle leading to 
apical ballooning caused by severe emotional or physical stress, such as losing 
a loved one, sudden illness, a severe accident, or a natural disaster (eg, 
earthquake). Takotsubo cardiomyopathy occurs in women 90% of the time, most 
commonly in postmenopausal women, and often resolves within a month.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29939609

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Saba Mughal declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Yusra Azhar 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Margaret Mahon declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Waqas Siddiqui declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.
