1. Interrupted Aortic Arch.

Ramirez Alcantara J(1), Mendez MD(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 8.

Author information:
(1)Lincoln Med/Weill Cornell Med College
(2)Lincoln Medical Center/Weil Cornell

Congenital heart disease is an abnormal formation of the heart or blood vessels 
next to the heart. It has an incidence of 8 cases of every 1000 live birth 
worldwide. In the United States, congenital heart disease affects 1% of births 
(40,000) per year, of which 25% have critical Congenital heart disease. In the 
U.S. the congenital heart disease represents approximately 4.5% of all neonatal 
deaths. The survival rate of patients with congenital heart disease will depend 
on the severity, time of diagnosis, and treatment. Approximately 97% of babies 
born with a non-critical congenital heart disease have a life expectancy of one 
year of age, and approximately 95% are expected to live around 18 years of age. 
A rare type of congenital heart disease is an interrupted aortic arch (IAA), 
which affects approximately 1.5% of congenital heart disease 
patients. Interrupted aortic arch is an anomaly that can be considered the most 
severe form of aortic coarctation. In an IAA, there is an anatomical and luminal 
disruption between the ascending and descending aorta. IAA is a ductus dependent 
lesion since this is the only way the blood flow can travel to places distal to 
the disruption. There is posterior malalignment of the conal septum additional 
to the interrupted aortic arch, producing a ventricular septal defect as an 
associated lesion. This lesion is present is approximately 73% of all cases. Due 
to this malalignment, there could be left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. 
Besides a ventricular septal defect, IAA can be associated with other more 
complicated cardiac anomalies; for example, transposition of the great arteries, 
truncus arteriosus, aortopulmonary window, single ventricle, aortic valve 
atresia, right-sided ductus, and double-outlet right ventricle.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30422497

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Jonanlis Ramirez Alcantara declares 
no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Magda 
Mendez declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
