1. Marfan Syndrome.

Salik I(1), Rawla P(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 23.

Author information:
(1)Westchester MC/New York Med. College
(2)Sovah Health, Martinsville, VA

One of the most common inherited disorders affecting connective tissue, Marfan 
syndrome (MFS), is an autosomal dominant condition with a reported incidence of 
1 in 3000 to 5000 individuals. The defect is in the FBN1 gene of chromosome 15, 
which produces fibrillin, a connective tissue protein. There is a broad range of 
clinical severity associated with MFS, ranging from isolated features of MFS to 
neonatal presentation of severe and rapidly progressive disease involving 
multiple organ systems. The syndrome is associated with classic ocular, 
cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal abnormalities, although involvement of the 
lung, skin, and central nervous system may also occur. Decreased life expectancy 
occurs primarily due to aortic complications including aortic root dilatation 
and dissection. The patients with MFS display multiple deformities of the 
skeleton including dolichostenomelia (long limbs compared to trunk), 
arachnodactyly (abnormally long and thin digits), thoracolumbar scoliosis, 
and pectus deformities (excavatum and carinatum). Aortic regurgitation, 
dilatation, and aneurysms are most common in the cardiovascular system. Mitral 
valve prolapse can also occur. Ocular findings include dislocation of the lens, 
cataract, myopia, and retinal detachment. The diagnosis of MFS is usually made 
clinically based on typical abnormalities. Craniofacial characteristics, thumb 
and wrist signs, severe hindfoot valgus, and pectus carinatum are the physical 
features with the highest diagnostic yield. There is no specific laboratory test 
except for molecular genetic testing for the diagnosis of MFS. There is no 
specific treatment that cures MFS but specific interventions may improve certain 
aspects of the syndrome. Medical therapy with beta-blockers and other 
afterload-reducing agents is targeted at reducing stress on the aortic valve, 
mitral valve, and aortic root. Outcome improves with early diagnosis, medical 
treatment to delay or prevent the progression of aortic dilatation, and timely 
elective surgery.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30726024

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Irim Salik declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Prashanth Rawla 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
