1. Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Sickle Cell Disease.

Ashorobi D(1), Naha K(2), Bhatt R(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 19.

Author information:
(1)Nassau University Medical Center
(2)University of Missouri-Columbia

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is the most common hemoglobinopathy in the United 
States. SCD affects about 100,000 Americans, mostly of African 
descent. Approximately 20 million individuals worldwide are affected by SCD. The 
molecular basis of SCD was poorly understood when the disease was first 
described in the early 1900s. It was not until 1949 when Dr. Linus Pauling 
carried out a landmark study, that it was determined that this condition is 
caused by abnormal hemoglobin that sickles when exposed to a low-oxygen 
environment. The abnormal form of hemoglobin in SCD arises from a single amino 
acid mutation in the beta-globin gene called hemoglobin S. Because SCD is an 
autosomal recessive disorder, both beta-globin genes must be mutated for an 
individual to develop overt disease. When only a single copy of the gene is 
mutated, the resulting phenotype is termed sickle cell trait. Sickle cell trait 
is usually benign, but affected persons may develop sickled cells when exposed 
to exceptionally low pressures of oxygen. Since 1949, scientists have made 
steady progress in understanding the complex molecular pathology of SCD. 
However, until about two decades ago, no known cure for this genetic disorder 
existed. According to Dr. Mary T. Basset, a physician during the American civil 
rights movement, SCD research, screening, and treatment received little to no 
funding and was neglected because patients were primarily of African 
descent. One of the significant achievements of the civil rights movement in the 
1970s was the establishment of the Sickle Cell Disease Association of 
America and the creation of the Sickle Cell Anemia Act of 1972. Since then, 
there has been greater public awareness of SCD and incrementally more funding 
towards finding a cure, culminating in the first bone marrow stem cell 
transplant for SCD.  The Sickle Cell Anemia Act also improved screening 
processes for SCD. Today, in most parts of the United States, sickle cell 
screening is performed before discharging neonates from the hospital. This 
screening allows for early medical intervention and reduces morbidity and 
mortality from SCD. Treatment of SCD has improved, incorporating penicillin 
prophylaxis for children younger than 5, hydroxyurea to boost fetal hemoglobin 
levels, prophylactic blood transfusions, and pain medications, including 
opioids. Unfortunately, most of these treatments are palliative, and 
patients continue to experience poor quality of life because of recurrent pain 
episodes, end-organ damage, and a reduced life expectancy, underscoring the 
importance of seeking a cure for this condition. In September 2018, the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) launched the Cure Sickle Cell 
Initiative. Under this initiative, efforts are being made to develop new genetic 
approaches to cure SCD. Advancement in gene therapy techniques has shown 
promising results in preclinical and clinical trials, but formal approval by the 
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is still awaited.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30860750

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Damilola Ashorobi declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Kushal 
Naha declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Ruchi Bhatt declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.
