1. Schizophrenia.

Hany M(1), Rehman B(2), Azhar Y(3), Chapman J(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Mar 20.

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
(2)Keele University School of Medicine
(3)Dow University of Health Sciences
(4)Lahey Health Systems

Derived from the Greek 'schizo' (splitting) and 'phren' (mind) with the term 
first coined by Eugen Bleuler in 1908, schizophrenia is a functional 
psychotic disorder characterized by the presence of delusional beliefs, 
hallucinations, and disturbances in thought, perception, and behavior. 
Traditionally, symptoms have been divided into two main categories: positive 
symptoms, which include hallucinations, delusions, and formal thought disorders, 
and negative symptoms such as anhedonia, poverty of speech, and lack of 
motivation. The diagnosis of schizophrenia is clinical, made exclusively 
after obtaining a full psychiatric history and excluding other causes of 
psychosis. Risk factors include birthing complications, the season of birth, 
severe maternal malnutrition, maternal influenza in pregnancy, family history, 
childhood trauma, social isolation, cannabis use, minority ethnicity, and 
urbanization. Due to its relative complexity and heterogeneity, the etiology and 
pathophysiological mechanisms are not fully understood. Despite a low 
prevalence, schizophrenia's global burden of disease is immense. Over half of 
the patients have significant co-morbidities, both psychiatric and 
medical, making it one of the leading causes of disability 
worldwide. The diagnosis correlates with a 20% reduction in life expectancy, 
with up to 40% of deaths attributed to suicide.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30969686

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Manassa Hany declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Baryiah Rehman 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Yusra Azhar declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Jennifer Chapman declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies.
