1. Mitral Valve Repair.

Salik I(1), Lee LS, Widrich J(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 24.

Author information:
(1)Westchester MC/New York Med. College
(2)University of Florida

Although the standard of care for mitral valve (MV) pathology due to 
degenerative changes is surgical repair, patient outcomes depend on multiple 
factors including pre-operative status, the severity of mitral regurgitation 
(MR), the technique of repair and surgeon and center experience. If MV repair is 
carried out in a timely fashion, the operative risk is low, and life expectancy 
is close to that of similar sex-aged matched controls. In high-risk patients, 
the choice amongst surgical, percutaneous, and conservative approaches can be 
challenging but should have as its basis patient comorbidities and surgical 
expertise. Mitral valve repair (MVr) surgery has some advantages over mitral 
valve replacement (MVR), although patient-specific factors must be taken into 
consideration. Of note, close to 50% of patients with severe mitral valve 
pathology are not candidates for surgical intervention due to age or other 
comorbidities. Up to 2 to 3% of adults in the United States are afflicted with 
degenerative mitral valve disease. Patients with degenerative MV pathology who 
develop symptoms of MR have a poor prognosis, with annual mortality rates of up 
to 34%. Mitral stenosis (MS), primarily caused by rheumatic heart disease (RHD), 
is commonly treated by percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty or MVR. Repair 
is usually not feasible in these patients with rheumatic mitral disease. MR is 
classified as primary or secondary, depending on whether the lesion is located 
at the mitral valve apparatus or due to left ventricular changes, respectively. 
While severe primary MR still receives treatment with surgical intervention, 
percutaneous techniques for repair and replacement are also gaining traction. 
MVR may be considered in patients with MR caused by papillary muscle rupture, 
degenerative and ischemic MR, or in patients with a failed repair undergoing 
reoperation.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31751069

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Irim Salik declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Lawrence Lee 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Jason Widrich declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.
