1. Spinal Osteoarthritis.

Lindsey T(1), Dydyk AM(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 9.

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama
(2)Abrazo Central Campus

Osteoarthritis is a common condition involving articular surfaces that can 
develop gradually over time into a debilitating condition that causes pain and 
restriction of motion. An estimated 80% of Americans have an episode of low back 
pain during their lifetime. Low back pain is among the most common causes of 
healthcare visits in the United States, accounting for over 45 million trips in 
2006. Spine osteoarthritis is a significant source of chronic low back pain. 
While most cases of spine arthritis-related pain are self-limited, requiring 
only conservative therapy, chronic back pain treatment involves significant 
healthcare dollars. In 2016, patients in the United States spent an estimated 
$380 billion on low back and neck pain. $3.1 trillion, about 17.9% of the gross 
domestic product, was spent on this diagnosis. Low back pain and spine arthritis 
are among the leading health-related causes of disability and reduction in 
patient quality of life. The number of back pain cases continues to increase 
with the current obesity epidemic and increased life expectancy. Furthermore, 
low back pain accounts for an estimated 149 million lost workdays each year in 
the United States. These lost wages substantially affect America’s gross 
domestic product. Due to the complexity of the innervation of the spine and its 
surrounding structures, delineating the cause of low back pain can be 
difficult. In approximately 85% of cases, the source of back pain is 
unknown. Also complicating the diagnosis is how radiographic imaging of spine 
osteoarthritis does not necessarily correlate with patients' pain, leading to 
treatment options that may not improve symptoms. Arthritis can affect any 
articular surface; it is more likely to affect weight-bearing joints, including 
the joints of the spinal column. Functionally, the spine protects the spinal 
cord, sustains weight-bearing, and provides mobility. The spinal cord is 
composed of a three-joint complex. This complex consists of two facet joints 
(zygapophyseal joints), and one intervertebral disc, all of which are potential 
origins for back pain. These three components comprise a spinal motion segment, 
which facilitates degeneration over time. Degeneration forms vertebral 
osteophytes, facet joint osteoarthritis, and disc space narrowing. Specifically, 
spine osteoarthritis is the presence of disc degeneration and osteophyte 
formation.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31985983

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Thomas Lindsey declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Alexander Dydyk 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
