1. Trauma Organ Procurement.

Rosen RD(1), Singh A(2), Burns B(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 31.

Author information:
(1)Michigan State University
(2)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
(3)East Tennessee State University (ETSU)

Organ transplantation is the removal of an organ from one person (the donor), 
and placement into another (the recipient). Transplantation is performed in 
patients with end-stage organ failure and can increase life expectancy while 
also improving the patient's quality of life. The most commonly transplanted 
solid organ is the kidney, followed by the liver, heart, and lungs. Pancreatic 
and intestinal transplants are performed as well but are less common. More 
recently, vascularized composite allografts (VCAs, e.g., face, hand, penis) have 
been performed for reconstructive procedures. Non-vital tissues, such as bones, 
corneas, and tendons, may also be transplanted. Organ donations can arise from 
living or deceased donors, but deceased donors are more common. Deceased 
patients are the major contributor to donor organs, and the most common causes 
of death are cerebrovascular accidents followed closely by traumatic brain 
injuries. In recent years, opioid overdoses have become another significant 
source of deceased organ donation. The dead donor rule holds that patients must 
be declared dead before the harvesting of donor organs. Donations can arise from 
patients who have suffered brain death or circulatory death. Brain death is a 
clinical diagnosis, defined as the permanent loss of brain function. This 
condition requires an irreversible loss of consciousness, absence of brain stem 
reflexes, and a lack of spontaneous respiration. The diagnosis of brain death 
must be made before organ harvesting occurs. The definition of circulatory death 
is the irreversible loss of cardiopulmonary function. Donation after circulatory 
death has been increasing in attempts to address the demand/supply mismatch of 
donor organs worldwide. This process involves the withdrawal of life-sustaining 
treatment, followed by a declaration of death after permanent cessation of 
circulation. To avoid any conflicts of interest, the decision to withdraw care 
must take place before any discussion of organ donation, and members of the 
organ procurement/transplant teams should not be involved in the process of care 
withdrawal or the declaration of death. Living donations are less common but 
still serve to increase the existing donor pool. Over 7300 living donations were 
performed in the United States in 2019, saving patients from a potentially 
long-wait on the transplant list. The most frequently donated organ is a kidney, 
but portions of the liver or lung are transplanted as well. More recently, 
living donations of VCAs have been explored. There are three types of living 
donations, the most common being directed donation. In directed donations, the 
donor designates to whom their organ will be given - most frequently a family 
member or close social acquaintance. In non-directed donation, also-known-as 
altruistic donation, the donor does not specify a recipient, and the organ is 
matched to a patient in need. Paired donations are more complicated, but 
generally involved two (or more) patients with a willing donor who is not a 
match for them. The pairs are then grouped, and the organs are 'traded' to 
ensure that all patients receive a compatible transplant. Living donations are 
considered safe, as donation has shown limited harmful outcomes, but patients 
must be closely followed to assess for medical and psychological harm. Long-term 
studies have suggested no adverse psychological outcomes with a living donation, 
and high levels of overall life satisfaction, both for directed and non-directed 
donation. Non-donors - potential donors who were unable to donate due to a 
negative match or withdrawal from consideration - were found to have lower 
levels of life satisfaction than living donors. The number of patients awaiting 
organ transplantation far outstrips the availability of donor organs. In the 
United States, estimates are that a new patient is added to the transplant list 
every ten minutes, and twenty patients die every day while awaiting transplant. 
In 2019, surgeons performed nearly 40,000 transplants, but at the end of the 
year, over 110,000 patients remained on the waiting list. While there are 
multiple ways to consent to organ donation (including a signed donor 
designation, designation on a driver's license, or signed consent from the 
deceased's next-of-kin), the estimate is that only 30 to 40% of potential donors 
in the United States become actual organ donors. Approximately 80% of Americans 
support organ donation, but only 40% have an appropriate designation in place to 
donate their organs after death. This disconnect can be attributed, in part, to 
how the question of donation is presented. The United States operates under an 
opt-in system, where the default is not to be an organ donor, and an active 
action is necessary to become an organ donor. In an alternative strategy, 
the presumed consent system, citizens are designated as organ donors unless they 
elect to opt-out. This strategy, commonly used in retirement savings, has shown 
mixed results in practice, with increased organ donation in countries with very 
low rates, but no significant increase in others. Critics of this strategy argue 
that the policy is unethical, as failing to object is not equivalent to informed 
consent. Others have shown that increasing the pool of potential donors will not 
increase the number of transplants performed if the proper infrastructure is not 
in place.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32310407

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Ryan Rosen declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Abhishek Singh 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Bracken Burns declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.
