1. Cystic Fibrosis and Liver Disease.

Betapudi B(1), Aleem A(2), Kothadia JP(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 9.

Author information:
(1)UTHSC-Memphis
(2)Lehigh Valley Health Network, Allentown, USA
(3)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, James D. Eason Transplant 
Institute

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive (AR) disorder that commonly 
affects the White population with an annual incidence of approximately 1 in 
3,500 live births. This multisystem disorder is characterized by genetic 
mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene 
on chromosome 7, which encrypts a protein essential for the regulation of 
transmembrane chloride reabsorption. CFTR, a chloride channel, is expressed in 
secretory epithelial cells lining the airways, digestive system, reproductive 
system, and the skin. Homozygous mutations in the CFTR gene impairs the 
transport of chloride ions and the movement of water into and out of cells 
resulting in the inspissation of secretions leading to organ dysfunction. 
Although CF commonly affects the airways, approximately 10% to 15% of patients 
with CF demonstrate Cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease (CFLD). The 
improvement in the diagnostic modalities and management of CF that has had a 
positive impact on the life expectancy of patients with CF. Consequently, there 
has been a significant emergence of liver dysfunction in CF complicating the 
clinical course of the disease. CFTR dysfunction has a significant effect on 
cholangiocyte function causing an alteration in the final bile composition that 
causes chronic damage to the biliary epithelium resulting in the development of 
a broad spectrum of hepatobiliary complications ranging from cholestasis, 
progressive periportal fibrosis, biliary obstruction causing focal biliary 
cirrhosis which may progress to multinodular cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and 
hepatic decompensation.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32310546

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Bindu Betapudi declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Abdul Aleem 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Jiten Kothadia declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.
