1. Unilateral Diaphragmatic Paralysis.

O'Toole SM(1), Kramer J(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 26.

Author information:
(1)McLaren Oakland
(2)Michigan State University

Proper diaphragm function is essential for adequate ventilation and the function 
of the lungs. The diaphragm is considered the most important muscle for 
inhalation than the scalene, intercostal, and sternocleidomastoid muscles. It is 
also an important barrier that separates the abdominal and thoracic cavities. 
The diaphragm is innervated by the phrenic nerve separately on both the left and 
right sides. The phrenic nerve is composed of cervical nerve roots three through 
five. The diaphragm contracts downward to cause a negative intrathoracic 
pressure to allow lung expansion and passive airflow into the lungs for gas 
exchange. Diaphragm paralysis can be unilateral or bilateral; however, 
unilateral paralysis is more common. Unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis is a 
condition in which either the right or left side of the diaphragm loses the 
ability to contract to allow proper inspiration. This can result from muscular 
issues in the diaphragm or loss of innervation from the phrenic nerve to the 
hemidiaphragm. This can impact daily living by causing dyspnea at rest or during 
exercise, sleep disturbances, or in severe cases, decreased life 
expectancy. There are multiple potential causes for diaphragm dysfunction, 
including trauma or compression of the phrenic nerve, medications, demyelinating 
disorders, cervical spinal cord injury, or even congenital causes. This review 
is to provide an overview of unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis based on current 
literature to help with a better understanding of the topic, improve the 
clinical ability to recognize the condition, and review diagnostic and treatment 
options.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32491320

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Shane O'Toole declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Jeremy Kramer 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
