1. Lymphangitic Carcinomatosis.

AK AK(1), Mantri SN(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 4.

Author information:
(1)Manipal Hospitals
(2)Apollo Hospital Bangalore

Lymphangitis carcinomatosis is the malignant infiltration and inflammation of 
lymphatic vessels secondary to the metastatic spread of malignancy from a 
primary site. The carcinomatous infiltration of the lymphatic vessels almost 
always occurs in the pulmonary interstitial lymphatics (pulmonary lymphangitic 
carcinomatosis) though rare reports of lymphangitic carcinomatosis of skin, 
duodenum & kidney(non-pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis) have been described 
in the literature. Our focus of attention in this review is about pulmonary 
lymphangitic carcinomatosis, which almost always represents the clinical form of 
lymphangitic carcinomatosis. The terms pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis & 
pulmonary tumor embolism represent end-stage manifestations of malignancies and 
have been used synonymously in the literature given highly similar clinical & 
radiological features though the former represents a pathology predominantly 
restricted to the interstitium with absent tumor cells in pulmonary arteries and 
or capillaries, whereas the latter demonstrates the presence of tumor cells 
inside the pulmonary vessels. Dr. Gabriel Andral was the first to describe 
pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis in 1829 in a case of uterine 
malignancy. Subsequently, Troissier & Reynaud made a detailed description of the 
gross anatomy & histopathology in 1874. Although pulmonary lymphangitic 
carcinomatosis usually represents an end-stage malignancy with poor life 
expectancy, reports of increased survival have been observed in recent 
literature. The commonest causes for lymphangitic carcinomatosis include breast, 
lung, stomach, prostate, pancreas, colon, cervix, & uterine malignancies.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32809756

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Ajith Kumar AK declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Sumant Mantri 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
