1. Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment: Muscle Energy Procedure - Sacral 
Dysfunctions.

McParland B(1), DeLuca A(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2022 Aug 7.

Author information:
(1)Garden City Hospital / MSUCOM
(2)MSU/ Garden City

Osteopathic manipulative medicine involves an assortment of manual techniques 
and is utilized by many osteopathic physicians to treat a wide range of 
conditions. Low back pain is a common complaint encountered by many clinicians 
and proves to be challenging to diagnose and treat. Studies have shown about 85% 
of patients presenting with low back pain complaints are unable to be provided 
with a precise diagnosis for their symptoms. As specific etiologies are less 
commonly identified, continuous pain leading to limitations in activities 
results in decreased quality of life for patients. Muscle energy techniques 
(MET) have been an essential tool in correcting structural restrictions leading 
to low back pain, especially related sacral dysfunctions. These techniques were 
initially developed by Dr. Fred Mitchell, Sr. and later refined by Dr. Fred 
Mitchell, Jr., both osteopathic physicians. MET maneuvers employ an isotonic 
contraction produced by the patient to engage the dysfunction and is restricted 
by the physician with a counterforce. Each contraction is repeated three to five 
times with a relaxation and stretch phase in between as the physician moves the 
patient in a controlled motion until meeting the next barrier. The isometric 
contraction creates a reciprocal inhibition and relaxation of the antagonistic 
muscle, effectively treating soft tissue restrictive barriers and mobilizing 
joints. This process, in turn, reduces pain and improves circulation. Sacral 
motion within the SI joint can produce several dysfunctions: anterior torsion, 
posterior torsion, and unilateral flexion or extension dysfunctions. This 
article will discuss how to diagnose such sacral dysfunctions and describe 
muscle energy techniques used to correct such dysfunctions.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32809415

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Brian McParland declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Anthony DeLuca 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
