1. Spinal Muscle Atrophy.

Burr P(1), Reddivari AKR(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 17.

Author information:
(1)Greater Glasgow and Clyde
(2)University of Illinois

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) denotes a collection of inherited clinical 
syndromes causing degeneration of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord with 
associated destruction of alpha motor cells and presents clinically with 
characteristic proximal muscle weakness and atrophy. Homozygous deletion at 5q13 
(the coding region for the survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene) is responsible for 
95% of cases of SMA, and after cystic fibrosis is the second most common cause 
of autosomal recessive inherited related mortality with an estimated incidence 
of 1 in 6000 to 11000. Homozygous deletion at 5q13 is also referred to as 
classical proximal SMA and will be the focus of this article with differentials 
and other causes of SMA discussed below. SMA is heterogeneous in presentation 
and ranges from death within weeks of birth to mild proximal weakness developing 
during adulthood. Earlier presentations are typically associated with poorer 
function and prognosis: classification of SMA subtypes are determined by the age 
of onset as well as clinical severity and life expectancy.  SMA was first 
described in the 1890s, first by Guido Werdnig in describing intermediate and 
severe SMA in 2 brothers and then 7 cases by Johan Hoffmann; type I SMA is 
sometimes eponymously referred to as Werdnig-Hoffmann disease. Similarly, milder 
forms of SMA (type III) detailed by Kugelberg and Welander is sometimes 
eponymously referred to as Kugelberg-Welander disease.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32809522

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Pierce Burr declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Anil Kumar Reddy 
Reddivari declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible 
companies.
