1. Renal Clear Cell Cancer.

Arora RD(1), Limaiem F(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 1.

Author information:
(1)Delhi State Health Mission
(2)University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis Faculty of Medicine

Renal cell carcinoma, of which clear cell carcinoma is the most common 
histological subtype (80 to 90 percent), comprises 90 percent of all Kidney 
tumors. Traditional morphological classification of these tumors divides them 
into three main subtypes – clear cell, papillary, and chromophobe 
subtypes. Clear cell and papillary cell cancer originate from the proximal 
tubular cells, while chromophobe cell cancers originate from the intercalated 
cells. The percentage of distant metastases in these various subtypes varies 
from 15 percent in clear cell carcinoma to 3 percent in papillary and 4 percent 
in chromophobe cell cancers.  The cancer-specific 10-year survival ranges from 
71 percent in clear cell cancer to 91 percent in papillary cancer, 88 percent in 
chromophobe cancer, and 33 percent in collecting duct cancers. As is expected, 
diagnosis at an earlier stage offers a relatively higher chance of cure. The 
goals of the management of advanced RCC emphasize a focus upon improvement in 
the quality of life parameters. Clear cell tumors have the propensity to spread 
hematogenous, with direct extension into the major vessels – namely the renal 
veins and the inferior vena cava. Lung, bone, brain, liver, lymph nodes, liver, 
and adrenal glands form the main sites of dissemination. Lytic bony metastases, 
which might become sclerotic with treatment, can be present. Clear cell 
carcinoma is considered uniformly metastatic, irrespective of the tumor size.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33085377

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Rahul Arora declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Faten Limaiem 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
