1. Injury. 2023 Mar;54 Suppl 1:S31-S35. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2020.11.025. Epub 
2020 Nov 11.

New concepts in the surgical treatment of actual and impending pathological 
fractures in metastatic disease.

Cappellari A(1), Trovarelli G(1), Crimì A(1), Pala E(1), Angelini A(1), Berizzi 
A(1), Ruggieri P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Orthopedic Oncology, University of Padova, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Orthopedics and Orthopedic Oncology, University of Padova, 
Italy. Electronic address: pietro.ruggieri@unipd.it.

INTRODUCTION: Long bone metastases are a disease of high social importance. The 
goals of surgical treatment are to relieve pain, maintain or restore joint 
function, and prevent or treat pathological fractures. "Oligometastases" is a 
disease with a limited number (3-5) of metastatic lesions in the same body 
district, where an aggressive treatment can be carried out with "curative" 
intent. This study aimed to evaluate patients with bone metastases surgically 
treated to determine how surgical treatment can influence prognosis and quality 
of life, comparing solitary metastasis, oligometastases, and multiple 
metastases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of 130 patients with long 
bone metastases surgically treated between October 2015 and August 2019: 40 
patients had solitary metastasis; 38 had less than three metastases 
(oligometastases), and 52 had multiple metastases. Surgery was resection and 
reconstruction with a cemented prosthesis (95) or nailing (35).
RESULTS: Overall survival was significantly better in patients with solitary 
metastasis or oligometastases than in those with multiple metastases (p 
<0.0001). Patients treated with resection and prosthesis had significantly 
better survival than those treated with nailing (p <0.0001). Implant 
complications requiring surgical revision occurred in 20 patients treated with 
prostheses, while no complications occurred in patients treated with nailing.
DISCUSSION: Survival of cancer patients has improved in the last two decades, 
leading to an increase of diagnosed metastases. Patients with oligometastases 
have a survival similar to those with a single metastasis. Optimal implants 
survival curves should stay above the curves of patients survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Since there are no differences in survival, patients with 
oligometastases should be treated as patients with a solitary lesion, with more 
aggressive surgery (wide resection and reconstruction with prosthesis). 
Intramedullary nailing is still indicated in metaphyseal or diaphyseal 
metastases in patients with advanced disease or poor prognosis when the life 
expectancy does not overcome the expected survival of the nail, avoiding the 
need for further surgery.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2020.11.025
PMID: 33213863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Pietro 
Ruggieri is Consultant and Designer for Stryker and Exactech. Each author 
certifies that he or she has no commercial associations (e.g., consultancies, 
stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc.) that 
might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article.
