1. Termination of Life Support.

Dabi A(1), Rahman O(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2022 Oct 24.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch School of Medicine
(2)Indiana University Health

Physicians in both inpatient or outpatient capacity are increasingly exposed to 
patients with terminal illnesses in both acute settings as well while dealing 
with patients with chronic illnesses. In the inpatient scenario, critical care 
and hospitalist physicians are often charged with the management of severely ill 
patients that reach the 'end-of-life' stage because of an acute catastrophic 
event or a rapid deterioration or complication of one or more chronic 
comorbidities.  Exposure to patients with advanced age, presence of an 
increasing number of chronic illnesses (such as cancer, heart failure, 
cerebrovascular accident, and renal failure), rising number of invasive 
procedures, and more recently, the effects of the novel Coronavirus infection of 
2019 (COVID-19), have led the doctors caring for these patients to manage 
situations where death is imminent. An end-of-life patient is defined as one 
with a life expectancy of fewer than 12 months, per the UK General Medical 
Council. This includes patients likely to die within a few hours or days. If 
given a choice, most people, including those who are healthy, in the West, would 
like to die at home. Due to the factors listed above, physicians need to be 
aware of the principles of end-of-life care. Physicians help take care of their 
patients with curative intent, but when that is not possible, it is equally 
important for them to provide the patients the option of what many patients 
describe as a dignified 'good death.' Most patients describe this as "pain-free, 
distress free, with good symptom control, preferably in a place of choice with 
people of choice around them." Many would also like to be a minimum burden on 
their families, get their personal affairs in order before dying, and maintain 
mental clarity if possible while retaining a sense of value for life spent with 
a feeling of closure. This may be summarized in the all-encompassing phrase 
"comfort measures." Application of comfort measures for the terminally ill 
patient hence requires an understanding of the disease process, therapeutic 
measures for symptom relief, social situations, and mechanisms involved in the 
placement of such patients.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33231982

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Alok Dabi declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Omar Rahman 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
