1. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2023 Jan;18(1):97-108. doi: 
10.1080/17483107.2020.1839574. Epub 2020 Dec 18.

Design and development of a self-propelled indoor wheelchair with direct toilet 
accessibility.

Akhil JP(1), Ajith RR(2), Ranjith SK(2).

Author information:
(1)CET - Centre for Interdisciplinary Research, College of Engineering, 
Trivandrum, Kerala, India.
(2)Micro/Nanofluidics Research Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
College of Engineering, Trivandrum, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

PURPOSE: Existing wheelchair (WC) designs lack independent toilet accessibility, 
transferability and indoor manoeuvrability combined in a WC. In this regard, a 
new WC model is proposed to simultaneously accommodate these distinct and 
essential features. In this open-source hardware project, the design, analysis 
and fabrication of a new active commode WC for indoor applications are 
performed.
MATERIALS AND METHOD: A field survey is conducted to identify the requirements 
of users so as to choose specific features and design constraints for the WC. In 
this multipurpose self-propelled model, a temporarily detachable circular 
section is fitted in the seat position to access the water closet bowl. This 
hinged portion can be released by gravity before reaching above the closet 
basin. After the toilet usage, the circular lid can be brought back to the 
initial seating using a lever mechanism and a spring-loaded lock restrains its 
downward movement. Thereafter, it can be used as an ordinary WC for indoor 
applications. Moreover, a small wheel with 22 in diameter and removable 
hand-rests ensured the transferability between utilities. A CAD model is 
prepared and numerical simulation is performed to verify the structural 
stability of the design.
RESULTS: The optimized model is fabricated using standard manufacturing 
practices and is delivered to different persons with disabilities to collect 
user feedback. A systematic skill test is conducted to validate the compliance 
of the prototype with the user requirements including transferability and 
independent restroom access.
CONCLUSION: The opinions from most of the users are positive which categorically 
indicated that the proposed design addresses the multipurpose mobility 
requirements at indoors.Implications for rehabilitationThe expected outcomes and 
implications of the current commode WC project with regard to rehabilitation 
purpose are enlisted below:In the present scenario, a WC user is heavily 
dependent on external assistance to access private spaces in general and toilets 
in particular. The introduced model is capable to address this shortcoming by 
enabling the user to access the toilet utility directly by self 
propelling.Indeed, for a person with locomotor disability, a WC is the natural 
extension of his physical body. Thereby, this multipurpose commode WC design 
offers much Independence and greater flexibility to the indoor movements.The 
proposed design instils confidence to a WC user to access and transfer between 
facilities by means of self effort. Consequently it is expected to improve the 
quality of one's personal life significantly.Importantly, this is an open-source 
project, those who are interested in rehabilitation motives can modify the 
present design to suit their local requirements especially in resource-limited 
settings.

DOI: 10.1080/17483107.2020.1839574
PMID: 33337923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
