1. Biventricular Devices.

Ahmed I(1), Kayani WT(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 30.

Author information:
(1)Aga Khan University Pakistan
(2)Baylor College of Medicine

Heart failure is one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, 
and it is associated with poor life expectancy, poor quality of life, and a 
higher economic burden on the healthcare system. Heart failure can result from 
several causes, but left ventricular systolic dysfunction is the major cause of 
heart failure. Over the past three decades, advances in the medical management 
of patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction have improved the 
survival of the patients, but the morbidity and mortality related to heart 
failure remained elevated.  With an increase in the age of the population and 
advances in the treatment of ischemic heart diseases, the number of patients 
with heart failure continues to grow, which has introduced significant 
challenges to managing cardiac arrhythmia and advanced heart failure. In 
patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, electromechanical 
dyssynchrony from intraventricular conduction delays leads to hemodynamic 
inefficiencies, which consequently worsen functional mitral regurgitation and 
left ventricular remodeling, eventually leading to poor outcomes. In the early 
1990s, it was identified that electromechanical dyssynchrony plays a prominent 
role in heart failure, and pacing devices that stimulate several places in the 
heart at once could be utilized to offset this dyssynchrony and conduction 
delay. In the late 1990s, Auricchio and Kass first described the efficacy of 
multisite pacing in humans, which led to cardiac resynchronization therapy 
(CRT), the first use of artificial electrical stimulation for heart failure. 
Since then, cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) has been an important 
treatment modality for heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction. In 
this review, we will discuss the use of implantable pacing devices in heart 
failure with a primary focus on biventricular pacing (cardiac 
resynchronization), and we will discuss the pathophysiology, indications, 
complications, and clinical significance.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33620850

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Intisar Ahmed declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Waleed Kayani 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
