1. Diversity Goals for Evaluation and Treatment of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives.

Jabbari B(1), Saadabadi A(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 6.

Author information:
(1)Creighton University School of Medicine
(2)Western University/ Kaweah Delta

American Indians and Alaska Natives, also known as Native Americans and 
Indigenous Americans, represent 574 federally recognized Indian Nations, also 
called First Nations and sometimes referred to as tribes. Each Nation is unique 
with its own history, culture, and spiritual and traditional practices. Through 
treaties and executive orders, American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) Nations 
have been guaranteed a variety of services by the United States, including 
health care, education, and housing in exchange for tribal land and natural 
resources. Despite the legal obligation, inequitable social policies and 
practices, inadequate funding, and provider shortages have forced AIAN 
communities to face massive disparities in health. As a result, AIANs are 
disproportionately affected by chronic mental and physical health conditions 
compared to the general U.S. population, and they have the lowest life 
expectancy of any racial/ ethnic group in the U.S. It is important to address 
the barriers to adequate health and social care that have led to lower life 
expectancy rates and devasting disparities in health and health care delivery. 
This article will use a framework of structural competency to identify root 
causes of health disparities and discuss potential opportunities for targeted 
interventions to effectively and appropriately evaluate and treat AIAN patients.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 34033335

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Bahareh Jabbari declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Abdolreza 
Saadabadi declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible 
companies.
