1. Mental Health Challenges in Caring for American Indians and Alaska Natives.

Kwon SC(1), Saadabadi A(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2022 Sep 25.

Author information:
(1)Kaweah Delta Health Care District
(2)Western University/ Kaweah Delta

American Indians (AI) and Alaska Natives (AN), descendants of the indigenous 
people, are a diverse population group growing in number every year. Studies 
have shown that American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) have a decreased 
life expectancy, higher mortality rate, and lower quality of life than the 
general US population. In addition to having higher rates of general medical 
conditions such as diabetes, obesity, and high blood pressure, there is a high 
prevalence of mental health problems and psychiatric comorbidity amongst 
American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs). A national study comparing the 
prevalence of mental health disorders and associated treatment-seeking results 
showed higher rates of psychiatric disorders in American Indians and Alaska 
natives than non-Hispanic whites.  Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
violence, suicide, and substance use have been identified as some of the 
more prevalent mental health issues among AI/ANs when compared with the general 
population in the United States. Sociodemographic characteristics, including 
age, education, and income, are likely contributing factors for the number of 
psychiatric disorders seen in American Indians and Alaska Natives than other 
racial groups.  There should be an increased effort to improve AI/AN mental 
health care disparities through culturally competent clinical interventions. In 
working towards this goal, it is important to identify the existing disparities 
in mental health care delivery and outcomes among AI/ANs. This will then help 
guide the steps that are necessary for improved outcomes and reduction in health 
disparities.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 34033349

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Sherry Kwon declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Abdolreza 
Saadabadi declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible 
companies.
