1. Eur Urol Oncol. 2023 Feb;6(1):103-109. doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2021.07.004. Epub
2021  Jul 23.

Intermediate-risk Prostate Cancer-A Sheep in Wolf's Clothing?

Heidegger I(1), Hamdy FC(2), van den Bergh RCN(3), Heidenreich A(4), Sedelaar 
M(5), Roupret M(6); EAU Section of Oncological Urology Board (ESOU).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
Electronic address: isabel-maria.heidegger@i-med.ac.at.
(2)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Urology, Antonius Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Urology, Uro-Oncology, Robot Assisted and Reconstructive 
Urologic Surgery, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany; Department of 
Urology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Urology, Radboud University, Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Sorbonne Université, Urology Department, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France.

This case-based discussion describes a 65-year-old man newly diagnosed with 
International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) grade 2 prostate cancer 
(PCa). According to the European Association of Urology classification system, 
the patient harbors an intermediate-risk cancer. In step-by step discussion, we 
elaborate guideline-based treatment modalities for intermediate-risk PCa focused 
on debating active surveillance versus active treatment. Thereby, we discuss the 
importance of patient characteristics, including age, hereditary factors, life 
expectancy and comorbidity status, findings of multiparametric magnetic 
resonance imaging, as well as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) density and PSA 
kinetics, in predicting the clinical course of the disease. In addition, we 
focus on cribriform pathology as a predictor of adverse outcomes and critically 
discuss its relevance in patient management. Lastly, we outline genomic 
stratification in ISUP 2 cancer as a future tool to predict PCa aggressiveness. 
PATIENT SUMMARY: Based on current guidelines, patients with intermediate-risk 
prostate cancer are treated actively or can alternatively undergo an active 
surveillance approach when favorable risk factors are present. One major issue 
is to discriminate between patients who benefit from an active therapy approach 
and those who benefit from a deferred treatment. Therefore, reliable biomarkers 
and early predictors of disease progression are needed urgently.

Copyright © 2021 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euo.2021.07.004
PMID: 34305038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
