1. J Hand Ther. 2023 Jan-Mar;36(1):13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jht.2021.09.001. Epub
2021  Nov 1.

Evaluation of short-term and residual effects of Kinesio taping in chronic 
lateral epicondylitis: A randomized, double-blinded, controlled trial.

Balevi ISY(1), Karaoglan B(1), Batur EB(2), Acet N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Gazi University Faculty 
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Selcuk University Faculty 
of Medicine, Konya, Turkey. Electronic address: elifbalevi@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Lateral epicondylitis is degenerative tendinosis of the extensor 
carpi radialis brevis muscle and is the most common work/sports-related chronic 
musculoskeletal problem affecting the elbow.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the short term and residual effectiveness 
of the Kinesio taping method on pain, grip force, quality of life, and 
functionality.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized, double-blinded, controlled study.
METHODS: Subjects were 50 patients diagnosed with chronic unilateral lateral 
epicondylitis with a symptom duration of at least 12 weeks. During the first 
four weeks, the study group received a true inhibitor Kinesio taping while the 
control group received sham taping. In both groups, progressive stretching and 
strengthening exercises were given as a home program for six weeks. The primary 
outcome measure was the Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) for self-report of pain 
intensity; secondary outcome measures were Cyriax resistive muscle test 
evaluation, maximal grip strength, Patient- Rated Tennis Elbow Evaluation 
(PRTEE), and Short Form-36 (SF-36). After the treatment, patients were evaluated 
by the first assessor who was blinded to taping types.
RESULTS: There was a significant decrease in NRS scores overtime during the 
first four weeks in both groups (P < .001,) and effect sizes were large. There 
was no significant difference in Cyriax muscle resistance test maximal grip 
strength between groups (P > .05). However, there was a significant improvement 
in muscle strength of elbow extension and pronation in the study group detected 
in the intragroup analysis. Intragroup comparisons also showed a significant 
improvement in all subunits of the PRTEE and SF-36 except energy/vitality, 
social functioning, and pain in both groups (P < .05) with moderate to high 
effect sizes. PRTEE pain scores were significantly decreased in the study group 
compared to the placebo group (P < .05, d = 0.48).
CONCLUSION: The effects of Kinesio taping on muscle strength, quality of life, 
and function in chronic lateral epicondylitis are not superior to placebo. 
However, NRS scores showed that in the two weeks after Kinesio taping treatment, 
pain reduction persisted as a residual effect which may improve the exercise 
adherence and functionality.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jht.2021.09.001
PMID: 34736818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
