1. Rev Environ Health. 2021 Dec 10;38(1):85-96. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0116.
Print  2023 Mar 28.

Interventions of Unani medicine for maintenance of health with special reference 
to air quality: an evidence-based review.

Akhlaq S(1), Ara SA(1), Ahmad B(1), Fazil M(1), Akram U(1), Haque M(1), Khan 
AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Unani, CCRUM, New Delhi, India.

OBJECTIVES: This article aims to discuss the impact of air quality on human 
health, measures to achieve the goal of good indoor air quality and proposed 
benefits of interventions of Unani Medicine with an evidence-based approach.
CONTENT: The significance of air quality on the health of the community cannot 
be denied. Recent evidences from WHO illustrated data on severe air pollutants 
and their impacts on human health ranges from minor upper respiratory irritation 
to chronic respiratory ailments including lung carcinoma and heart disease 
associated with premature mortality and reduced life expectancy. In Unani 
Medicine, air has been included in the list of factors, which are six in number 
and play the central role in prevention of diseases and maintenance of health. 
Air is considered as the medium of most of the extrinsic factors such as 
chemical and biological pollutants affecting health and their exposure results 
in short and long-term health issues. The literature of Unani Medicine proposes 
many simple and effective measures, which help to improve indoor and outdoor air 
quality. The goal of outdoor clean air is achieved through implementation of 
measures to tackle the source of pollution, while indoor clean air is attained 
through various means e.g., fumigation with herbal drugs. Hence, an extensive 
literature survey on Unani reserve was conducted to collect information about 
the concept of air discussed under the heading of six essential factors and its 
implication in prevention of diseases and maintenance of health. Further, 
research databases such as Pub Med, Google Scholar, and Science-Direct were 
broadly searched for evidence on the efficacy of herbals mentioned in Unani 
literature for the indoor air purification and subsequent air quality 
improvement.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK: Recent studies showed good air quality leads to decrease in 
mortality, particularly of respiratory and cardiovascular deaths whereas poor 
air quality results in a variety of diseases. Unani scholars prescribed several 
regimens such as Bukhoor (Fumigation), Sa'oot (Nasal instillation) and use of 
Abeer (Perfumes) and Nadd (Incense) for the improvement of air quality. Likewise 
various herbal fumigants and sprays containing drugs like mī'a sā'ila 
(Liquidambar orientalis Mill.), mastagi (Pistacia lentiscus L.), mushk (Moschus 
moschiferus L.), loban (Styrax benzoides W. G. Craib), ābnoos (Diospyros ebenum 
J. Koenig ex Retz), zā'fran (Crocus sativus L.) and sirka (vinegar) etc. has 
been well explained and used exclusively for air purification and improvement of 
AQI. Therefore, in the present scenario of altered air quality, we forward 
certain measures described in Unani system of medicine for health promotion and 
protection. Scientific evidence on several drugs reveal the presence of a number 
of pharmacologically active substances, which may provide a new approach into 
the purification of air.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0116
PMID: 34883008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
