1. J Orthop Sci. 2023 Mar;28(2):391-397. doi: 10.1016/j.jos.2021.11.011. Epub
2021  Dec 16.

Aquatic vs. land-based exercise after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy in 
middle-aged active patients with a degenerative meniscal tear: A randomized, 
controlled study.

Yesil M(1), Ozcan O(2), Dundar U(3), Toktas H(3), Yesil H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Afyonkarahisar Health Sciences 
University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. Electronic address: drmurat17@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Afyonkarahisar Health Sciences 
University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Afyonkarahisar Health 
Sciences University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Awareness of the value of aquatic exercise (AE) in the postoperative 
rehabilitation has increased, and several inherent advantages of AE, such as 
adjustment of both resistance and muscle strengthening parameters makes good 
rationale for its inclusion in postoperative rehabilitation. This study aimed to 
determine and compare the benefits of AE and land-based exercise (LBE) on pain, 
functionality, and quality of life after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy 
(APM).
METHODS: This randomized controlled study included 30 middle-aged (35-50), 
physically active patients who were randomized into LBE (n = 15) and AE (n = 15) 
groups after APM for a degenerative meniscal tear. Visual analogue scale (VAS), 
Short Form-36 (SF-36), single-leg hop test and Lysholm questionnaire scores in 
addition to isokinetic muscle strength values were evaluated at baseline, at 
fourth week immediately after cessation of exercise program and at eighth week 
follow-up visits. The exercise sessions were conducted in 1-h sessions per day, 
three days a week for a total of four weeks.
RESULTS: Significant improvement was observed in the VAS, single-leg hop test, 
Lysholm questionnaire, and most of SF-36 subscale scores in both groups at both 
fourth and eighth follow-ups. Isokinetic dynamometer revealed significant 
improvement in the peak torque values for extension at angular velocities of 60° 
and 180° at both follow-ups in the AE group. LBE group showed significant 
improvement in the peak torque value for extension only at an angular velocity 
of 60° only at fourth week follow-up. There was no significant difference 
between groups for any of these parameters at any of the follow-ups.
CONCLUSION: Both AE and LBE programs had significantly improved pain, function, 
isokinetic muscle strength, and quality of life in patients after APM. Either 
type of exercise is essential as part of the rehabilitation protocol for good 
clinical outcomes after APM and should not be neglected (level II).
CLINICALTRIALS REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04925726.

Copyright © 2021 The Japanese Orthopaedic Association. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jos.2021.11.011
PMID: 34924251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
