1. Disabil Rehabil. 2023 Jan;45(2):322-329. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2021.2022782. 
Epub 2022 Jan 3.

Effects of footwear on the gait kinematics of women with unilateral transtibial 
amputation: an observational case series.

Kent JA(1), Carnahan KJ(2), Stine RL(3), Hansen AH(4)(5)(6), Esposito 
ER(7)(8)(9)(10), Major MJ(2)(3)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, 
NV, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine and Rehabilitation, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, MN, USA.
(7)VA Puget Sound, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)DoD-VA Extremity Trauma and Amputation Center of Excellence, Fort Sam 
Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(10)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(11)Department of Biomedical Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

PURPOSE: Prosthesis geometry and behaviour limit the footwear options available 
to women. Using a commercially available prosthetic foot that permits 
user-alignment to accommodate shoes with different heel heights, we investigated 
the effect of footwear on gait kinematics, with and without adjustment for 
differences in heel-forefoot differential.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three women with transtibial amputation walked at a 
self-selected pace, first in an athletic shoe (prosthetist-aligned; baseline 
condition), then (i) in a flatter shoe without realigning the prosthesis, and 
(ii) in flat and heeled shoes following user re-alignment. Kinematics in each 
condition were compared to baseline.
RESULTS: Baseline gait patterns were highly variable across participants. Gait 
was slower in comparison to baseline in all conditions, but movement 
compensations varied across participants. An increased lower limb extension 
tendency was evident with the misaligned prosthesis. With user re-alignment to 
accommodate the shoe there were fewer deviations from baseline, however 
kinematic differences remained in both the flat and heeled shoes.
CONCLUSIONS: The user-alignment feature of the prosthetic foot reduced the 
effect of a change in footwear on kinematics, and permitted walking in heeled 
shoes when it might otherwise not be possible. Persistence of some deviations 
suggests differences in walking task demand remained despite 
adjustment.Implications for rehabilitationPermitting prosthesis users to don 
footwear of choice may improve body image, well-being and quality of life 
following amputation.Prosthetic feet that permit user ankle adjustment can 
reduce gait deviations associated with a change in footwear heel height, 
although kinematic adaptations are individual.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2021.2022782
PMID: 34978960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
