1. J Clin Nurs. 2023 May;32(9-10):2270-2281. doi: 10.1111/jocn.16242. Epub 2022
Feb  3.

'Nurses' self-management support to hospitalised patients: A scoping review.

Otter CEM(1), Keers JC(1), Smit J(2), Schoonhoven L(3)(4), de Man-van Ginkel 
JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Martini Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University of Applied Sciences Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Nursing Science, Julius Centre for Health Sciences and Primary Care, 
University Medical Centre Utrecht, University Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To review the current literature to map and explore the 
interventions that have been considered or used by nurses to support adult 
patients' self-management during hospitalisation.
BACKGROUND: Nurses can play an important role in supporting patients' 
self-management. Currently, however, it is unclear how nurses perform this task 
during a patient's stay in hospital. Traditionally, nurses take the primary role 
in managing patients' care during hospitalisation. Ideally, patients should have 
the opportunity to continue applying strategies to manage their health 
conditions as much as possible while in the hospital. This can increase 
patients' self-efficacy and decrease unnecessary readmissions.
DESIGN: Scoping review informed by the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology.
METHODS: A database search was undertaken using Pubmed, CINAHL, PsycInfo, 
Cochrane, Embase and grey literature sources. Data from the included studies 
were mapped and summarised in a narrative summary. To synthesise the information 
that was given about each intervention, we conducted a qualitative inductive 
content analysis. Results are reported in accordance with the guidelines for 
reporting Items for systematic review and meta-analyses extension for scoping 
review (PRISMA-ScR) (Supplementary File 1).
RESULTS: 83 documents were included in this review. Based on the information 
about the interventions, three themes were identified: 'self-management support 
activities', 'focus of self-management support' and the 'intervention 
procedure'. Five self-management support activities can be distinguished: 
'giving education', 'counselling and coaching', 'enhancing responsibility', 
'engaging family-caregivers' and 'supporting transition from hospital to home'. 
The interventions focused on improving disease-related knowledge and on 
strengthening several self-management skills. Information about the procedure, 
development and the theoretical underpinning of the intervention was often 
limited.
CONCLUSIONS: Most activities within the nursing interventions to support adult 
patients' self-management during hospitalisation are the part of regular nursing 
care. However, the transfer of responsibility for care task to the patient is 
relatively new. Further research could focus on developing interventions 
addressing all aspects of self-management and that are embedded in the patient's 
care pathway across settings.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Clinical nurses may improve nursing care by 
supporting all aspects of patients' self-management and facilitate patients as 
much as possible for taking responsibility for self-management tasks during 
hospitalisation.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.16242
PMID: 35118738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
