1. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Jul;33(5):283-297. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2022.01.015.
 Epub 2022 Feb 2.

The need for long-term personalized management of frail CVD patients by 
rehabilitation and telemonitoring: A framework.

Scherrenberg M(1), Marinus N(2), Giallauria F(3), Falter M(4), Kemps H(5), 
Wilhelm M(6), Prescott E(7), Vigorito C(3), De Kluiver E(8), Cipriano G Jr(9), 
Dendale P(10), Hansen D(11).

Author information:
(1)Heart Centre Hasselt, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium; UHasselt, Faculty of 
Medicine and Life Sciences, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Antwerp University, Belgium.
(2)UHasselt, Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, BIOMED-REVAL, Hasselt, Belgium.
(3)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University of 
Naples.
(4)Heart Centre Hasselt, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium; UHasselt, Faculty of 
Medicine and Life Sciences, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Cardiology, KULeuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Máxima Medical Center, The Netherlands; Department 
of Industrial Design, Technical University Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University 
of Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Cardiology, Bispebjerg University Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, NW, Denmark.
(8)Isala Heart Centre, Zwolle, The Netherlands.
(9)Physical Therapy Department, University of Brasilia, Brazil.
(10)Heart Centre Hasselt, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium; UHasselt, Faculty of 
Medicine and Life Sciences, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(11)Heart Centre Hasselt, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium; UHasselt, Faculty of 
Rehabilitation Sciences, BIOMED-REVAL, Hasselt, Belgium. Electronic address: 
dominique.hansen@uhasselt.be.

Due to advances in cardiovascular medicine and preventive cardiology, patients 
benefit from a better prognosis, even in case of significant disease burden such 
as acute and chronic coronary syndromes, advanced valvular heart disease and 
chronic heart failure. These advances have allowed CVD patients to increase 
their life expectancy, but on the other hand also experience aging-related 
syndromes such as frailty. Despite being underrecognized, frailty is a critical, 
common, and co-existent condition among older CVD patients, leading to exercise 
intolerance and compromised adherence to cardiovascular rehabilitation (CR). 
Moreover, frail patients need a different approach for CR and are at very high 
risk for adverse events, but yet are underrepresented in conventional CR. 
Fortunately, recent advances have been made in technology, allowing remote 
monitoring, coaching and supervision of CVD patients in secondary prevention 
programs with promising benefits. Similarly, we hypothesized that such programs 
should also be implemented to treat frailty in CVD patients. However, 
considering frail patients' particular needs and challenges, telerehabilitation 
interventions should thus be appropriately adapted. Our purpose is to provide, 
for the first time and based on expert opinions, a framework of how such a 
cardiac telerehabilitation program could be developed and implemented to manage 
a prevention and rehabilitation program for CVD patients with frailty.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcm.2022.01.015
PMID: 35121082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
