1. J Hand Surg Am. 2023 Apr;48(4):377-387. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2021.12.002. Epub 
2022 Feb 19.

Radiological, Clinical, and Functional Outcomes of Combined Dorsal and Volar 
Locking Plate Osteosynthesis for Complex Distal Radius Fractures.

Lüdi S(1), Kurz C(2), Deforth M(3), Ghafoor H(4), Haefeli M(5), Honigmann P(6).

Author information:
(1)Hand Surgery, Kantonsspital Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), 
Switzerland; Department of Plastic, Reconstructive, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, 
Kantonsspital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
simona.luedi@gmail.com.
(2)Hand Surgery, Kantonsspital Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), 
Switzerland; Department of Plastic, Reconstructive, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, 
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Handclinic AG Rüti, Rüti, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Kantonsspital Baselland 
(Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), Switzerland.
(4)Hand Surgery, Kantonsspital Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), 
Switzerland; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Kantonsspital 
Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), Switzerland.
(5)Hand Surgery, Kantonsspital Graubünden, Chur, Switzerland; Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physics, 
Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Hand Surgery, Kantonsspital Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), 
Switzerland; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Kantonsspital 
Baselland (Bruderholz, Liestal, Laufen), Switzerland; Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physics, Amsterdam 
Movement Sciences, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Medical Additive 
Manufacturing research group, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University 
of Basel, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to assess the short- to mid-term 
radiologic, clinical, and functional outcomes of patients treated with combined 
dorsal and volar locking plating for internal fixation of complex, comminuted, 
intra-articular, distal radius fractures.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of 34 patients treated with 
combined dorsal and volar locking plates for the internal fixation of complex, 
comminuted, intra-articular distal radius fractures. Radiographic and clinical 
parameters were recorded at a mean of 48 months after surgery. Activities of 
daily living and quality of life were assessed by the Disabilities of the Arm, 
Shoulder, and Hand and Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation questionnaires.
RESULTS: Compared with the contralateral wrist, the treated wrist regained 73% 
of flexion, 81% of extension, 86% of ulnar deviation, 90% of radial deviation, 
98% of pronation, 99% of supination, and 93% of grip strength. Mean Disabilities 
of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand and Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation scores were 11 
(range, 0-78) and 11 (range, 0-77), respectively. Radial height and radial 
inclination were restored anatomically in 24% and 41% of patients, respectively, 
while volar tilt and ulnar variance were restored in 68% of patients.
CONCLUSION: The overall functional and radiologic outcome of patients with 
comminuted intra-articular complex distal radius fractures treated with the 
combined dorsovolar plate osteosynthesis was good to excellent.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic IV.

Copyright © 2023 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2021.12.002
PMID: 35190216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
