1. J Neurochem. 2023 Feb;164(3):325-345. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15598. Epub 2022 Apr
14.

Clear-headed into old age: Resilience and resistance against brain aging-A PET 
imaging perspective.

Hoenig MC(1)(2), Drzezga A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center Juelich, Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine II, 
Molecular Organization of the Brain, Juelich, Germany.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn/Cologne, Germany.

With the advances in modern medicine and the adaptation towards healthier 
lifestyles, the average life expectancy has doubled since the 1930s, with 
individuals born in the millennium years now carrying an estimated life 
expectancy of around 100 years. And even though many individuals around the 
globe manage to age successfully, the prevalence of aging-associated 
neurodegenerative diseases such as sporadic Alzheimer's disease has never been 
as high as nowadays. The prevalence of Alzheimer's disease is anticipated to 
triple by 2050, increasing the societal and economic burden tremendously. 
Despite all efforts, there is still no available treatment defeating the 
accelerated aging process as seen in this disease. Yet, given the advances in 
neuroimaging techniques that are discussed in the current Review article, such 
as in positron emission tomography (PET) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
pivotal insights into the heterogenous effects of aging-associated processes and 
the contribution of distinct lifestyle and risk factors already have and are 
still being gathered. In particular, the concepts of resilience (i.e. coping 
with brain pathology) and resistance (i.e. avoiding brain pathology) have more 
recently been discussed as they relate to mechanisms that are associated with 
the prolongation and/or even stop of the progressive brain aging process. Better 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of resilience and resistance may one 
day, hopefully, support the identification of defeating mechanism against 
accelerating aging.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15598
PMID: 35226362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
