1. J Rural Health. 2023 Jun;39(3):535-544. doi: 10.1111/jrh.12656. Epub 2022 Mar
8.

Medical education for African American communities in the rural South: A focus 
group approach to identify fundamental considerations.

Wheat JR(1), Gardner AJ(2), Downey LH(3), Cox MS(4)(5), Johnson GJ(6), Guin 
SM(1), Leeper JD(1), Moore CE(1), Brandon JE(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Community Health Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, 
Alabama, USA.
(2)Department of Food Science, Nutrition, & Health Promotion, College of 
Agriculture & Life Sciences, Mississippi State University, Starkville, 
Mississippi, USA.
(3)School of Human Sciences, Mississippi State University, Starkville, 
Mississippi, USA.
(4)Southern California University Health Sciences, Whittier, California, USA.
(5)Aurora University, Aurora, Illinois, USA.
(6)Tuskegee University Cooperative Extension Program, Tuskegee University, 
Tuskegee, Alabama, USA.
(7)Pickens County Primary Care, Reform, Alabama, USA.

PURPOSE: We sought to understand concerns fundamental to planning medical 
education specific to rural southern African Americans who are virtually 
nonexistent in American medical schools.
METHODS: A diverse multidisciplinary research team conducted this qualitative 
study with 3 focus groups, including 17 rural medical educators recruited 
nationwide, 10 African American alumni of a rural medical education pipeline in 
Alabama, and 5 community and institutional associates of this pipeline. Analysis 
of recorded transcripts generated themes fitting an ecological model suggesting 
concerns and intervention foci at individual, community, and institutional 
levels.
FINDINGS: Three major themes operating at all ecological levels were: (1) How 
"rural minority student" is defined, with "rural" often supplanting race to 
indicate minority status; (2) Multiple factors relate to rural racial minority 
student recruitment and success, including personal relationships with peers, 
mentors, and role models and supportive institutional policies and culturally 
competent faculty; and (3) Challenges to recruitment and retention of rural 
minority students, especially financial concerns and preparation for medical 
education.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that individuals, communities, and 
institutions provide intervention points for planning medical education specific 
to southern rural African Americans. These spheres of influence project a need 
for partnership among communities and rural medical educators to affect broad 
programmatic and policy changes that address the dire shortage of rural African 
American health professionals to help ameliorate health inequities experienced 
in their home communities. It is likely that linear thinking and programming 
will be replaced by integrated, intertwined conceptualizations to reach this 
goal.

© 2022 The Authors. The Journal of Rural Health published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of National Rural Health Association.

DOI: 10.1111/jrh.12656
PMID: 35261082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
