1. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 2023 Mar;66(2):101659. doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101659.
 Epub 2022 Dec 1.

Neuromuscular electrical stimulation after cardiovascular surgery mitigates 
muscle weakness in older individuals with diabetes.

Takino K(1), Kameshima M(2), Asai C(3), Kawamura I(4), Tomita S(5), Sato H(6), 
Hirakawa A(6), Yamada S(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Rehabilitation, Gifu Heart Center, 4-14-4, 
Yabuta-minami, Gifu, Japan; Program in Physical and Occupational Therapy, Nagoya 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiac Rehabilitation, Nagoya Heart Center, 1-1-11, 
Sunadabashi, higasi-ku, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiac Rehabilitation, Toyohashi Heart Center, 1-21, Gobudori, 
Oyamacho, Toyohasi, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Gifu Heart Center, 4-14-4, Yabuta-minami, Gifu, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Gifu Heart Center, 4-14-4, 
Yabuta-minami, Gifu, Japan.
(6)Division of Biostatistics and Data Science, Clinical Research Center, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University Hospital of Medicine, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Integrated Health Sciences, Nagoya University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 1-1-20 Daiko-Minami, Higashi-ku, Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address: 
yamadas@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular surgery leads to postsurgical muscle weakness, 
probably because of muscle proteolysis and peripheral nerve dysfunction, which 
are augmented by aging and diabetes mellitus.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the effect of neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) 
on postsurgical muscle weakness in older individuals with diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: We conducted a multicentre, randomized, controlled trial, and screened 
consecutive patients with diabetes who underwent cardiovascular surgery for 
eligibility (age ≥ 65 years). Those included were randomly assigned to the NMES 
or the sham group. The primary outcome was the percent change in isometric knee 
extension strength (%ΔIKES) from preoperative to postoperative day 7. Secondary 
outcomes were the percent change in usual (%ΔUWS), maximum walking speed 
(%ΔMWS), and grip strength (%ΔGS). A statistician who was blinded to group 
allocation used intention-to-treat analysis (student t test).
RESULTS: Of 1151 participants screened for eligibility, 180 (NMES, n = 90; sham, 
n = 90) were included in the primary analysis. %ΔIKES was significantly lower in 
the NMES than sham group (NMES: mean -2%, 95% confidence interval [CI] -6 to 1; 
sham: -13%, 95% CI -17 to -9, p < 0.001). Among the secondary outcomes, %ΔMWS 
was significantly lower and %ΔUWS and %ΔGS were lower, although not 
significantly, in the NMES than sham group.
CONCLUSIONS: A short course of NMES (< 1 week) mitigated postsurgical muscle 
weakness and functional decline in older persons with diabetes mellitus. NMES 
could be recommended as a part of postsurgical rehabilitation in older people 
with diabetes mellitus, especially those with a low functional reserve.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rehab.2022.101659
PMID: 35272065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest AH reports 
grants and personal fees from Ono Pharmaceutical, and personal fees from 
Astellas Pharma, Abbvie, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, Kissei Pharmaceutical, 
Pfizer, Nippon Shinyaku, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Torii 
Pharmaceutical, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, Teijin Pharma, Fuji Pharma, Japan 
Tobacco, HEALIOS K.K, Life Science Institute, Inc., and Novartis Japan. Outside 
the submitted work, S.Y. received honorarium for lecturing from Daiichi-Sankyo, 
Toa Eiyo, Otsuka, and Tanabe-Mitsubishi, and collaborative research grants from 
Epson Kenpokumiai, Minato Medical Science Co. Ltd. and Inter Reha Co. Ltd, and 
has consulted for Prevent Co. Ltd. The waveform of the neuromuscular electrical 
stimulation device used in this study was registered by SY and patented at 
Nagoya University. The waveform developed in Nagoya University was produced by 
Minato Medical Science Co., and they provided NMES with sham stimulation codes 
and electrodes for this study. All other authors declare no competing interests
