1. Telemed J E Health. 2023 Jan;29(1):23-37. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2022.0016. Epub
2022  May 30.

A Telehealth and Telepsychiatry Economic Cost Analysis Framework: Scoping 
Review.

Hilty DM(1)(2), Serhal E(3), Crawford A(3).

Author information:
(1)Northern California Veterans Administration Health Care System, Mather, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, UC Davis, Sacramento, 
California, USA.
(3)ECHO Ontario Mental Health and ECHO Ontario Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Introduction: Despite a good evidence base for telepsychiatry (TP), economic 
cost analyses are infrequent and vary in quality. Methods: A scoping review was 
conducted based on the research question, "From the perspective of an economic 
cost analysis for telehealth and telepsychiatry, what are the most meaningful 
ways to ensure a study/intervention improved clinical care, provided value to 
participants, had population level impact, and is sustainable?" The search in 
seven databases focused on keywords in four concept areas: (1) economic cost 
analysis, (2) evaluation, (3) telehealth and telepsychiatry, and (4) 
quantifiable health status outcomes. The authors reviewed the full-text articles 
based on the inclusion (Medical Subject Headings [MeSH] of the keywords) and 
exclusion criteria. Results: Of a total of 2,585 potential references, a total 
of 99 articles met the inclusion criteria. The evaluation of telehealth and TP 
has focused on access, quality, patient outcomes, feasibility, effectiveness, 
outcomes, and cost. Cost-effectiveness, cost-benefit, and other analytic models 
are more common with telehealth than TP studies, and these studies show 
favorable clinical, quality of life, and economic impact. A standard framework 
for economic cost analysis should include: an economist for planning, 
implementation, and evaluation; a tool kit or guideline; comprehensive analysis 
(e.g., cost-effectiveness or cost-benefit) with an incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio; measures for health, quality of life, and utility 
outcomes for populations; methods to convert outcomes into economic benefits 
(e.g., monetary, quality of adjusted life year); broad perspective (e.g., 
societal perspective); sensitivity analysis for uncertainty in modeling; and 
adjustments for differential timing (e.g., discounting and future costs). 
Conclusions: Technology assessment and economic cost analysis-such as 
effectiveness and implementation science approaches-contribute to clinical, 
training, research, and other organizational missions. More research is needed 
with a framework that enables comparisons across studies and meta-analyses.

DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2022.0016
PMID: 35639444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
