1. Value Health. 2023 Jan;26(1):4-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2022.05.001. Epub 2022
Jun  4.

Patient Expectations About Palliative Treatment for Symptomatic Spinal 
Metastases: A Qualitative Study.

Gal R(1), Charest-Morin R(2), Verlaan JJ(3), Fisher CG(2), Wessels H(4), 
Verkooijen HM(5), Versteeg AL(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Imaging and Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
r.gal@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Division of Spine, Department of Orthopaedics, Vancouver General 
Hospital/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Corporate Communications, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Division of Imaging and Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with spinal metastases often receive palliative surgery or 
radiation therapy to maintain or improve health-related quality of life. 
Patients with unrealistic expectations regarding treatment outcomes have been 
shown to be less satisfied with their post-treatment health status. This study 
evaluated expectations of patients with spinal metastases scheduled for surgery 
and/or radiation therapy.
METHODS: Individual semistructured interviews were conducted with patients with 
symptomatic spinal metastases before and 6 weeks after surgery and/or radiation 
therapy. Expectations regarding treatment outcomes were discussed before 
treatment, and level of fulfillment of these pretreatment expectations was 
discussed after treatment. Interviews were recorded, transcribed and analyzed 
according to the thematic analysis method to identify themes.
RESULTS: Before treatment, patients thought they were not, or minimally, 
informed about (expected) treatment outcomes, but they felt well informed about 
treatment procedures and possible complications. Although patients expected pain 
relief and improvement in daily functioning, they found it difficult to describe 
any recovery timeline or the impact of these expected improvements on their 
daily life. Patients generally understood that treatment was not curative, but 
lacked insight into the impact of treatment on life expectancy given that this 
was hardly discussed by their surgeon and/or radiation oncologist. Pretreatment 
expectations regarding pain and daily functioning were only partially met in 
most patients post-treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients thought they were not, or only minimally, informed about 
expected outcomes after surgery and/or radiation therapy for symptomatic spinal 
metastases. Improvements in patient-physician communication and counseling could 
help guide patients toward realistic pretreatment expectations.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2022.05.001
PMID: 35672228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
