1. Teach Learn Med. 2023 Aug-Sep;35(4):422-435. doi:
10.1080/10401334.2022.2080068.  Epub 2022 Jun 16.

Elements and Determinants of Professional Identity During the Pandemic: A 
Hermeneutic Qualitative Study.

Consorti F(1), Consorti G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, University Sapienza of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Clinical-Based Human Research Department, Centre for Osteopathic Medicine 
Collaboration, Pescara, Italy, Educational Department of Osteopathy, Istituto 
Superiore Osteopatia, Milan, Italy.

Phenomenon: The construct of professionalism in undergraduate medical education 
is a core outcome that is included in the wider concept of professional identity 
formation. The former is grounded in the more general concept of identity, 
intended as an internalized set of role expectations. Some have proposed 
frameworks based on psychological or sociological approaches, but empirical 
research is still scarce and often limited to the exploration of the role of 
specific learning activities. The pandemic imposed adaptations that produced an 
artificial setting for a social experiment, suitable to observe how the 
deprivation of the social component of a student's life, such as in presence 
teaching and practical training, unveiled the elements and determinants of the 
developing identity of medical students. Approach: This research was the 
extension of a previous phenomenological study about medical students' lived 
experience of distance learning during the lockdown phase in Italy. We adopted a 
hermeneutic approach to furtherly deepen the analysis of the phenomenon at 
stake, in dialogue with the relevant literature. Eight 6th year medical students 
underwent an in-depth interview, themes were inductively generated and used to 
identify elements and determinants of the developing identities. Findings: Four 
themes developed, synthetized in the overarching theme "From crawling to 
standing on your feet and walking toward an uncertain future". The themes were: 
"social places and practices that make me feel like a student and a medical 
student", "toward self-regulation", "an emotional journey", "threats to the 
identity". The elements of the perceived identity as a medical student were 
autonomy and learning self-regulation, professional knowledge, competence, and 
sense of belonging to a community. The determinant factors which influenced the 
identity as a medical student were living environment, learning spaces and 
architectures, the social networks, the attendance of the healthcare facilities, 
the relationship with teachers, the social acknowledgement as a medical student, 
and as a doctor. Insights: It was possible to identify the generation of both 
constitutive elements of identity and determinants influencing identity 
development and this distinction is an added value of the research. According 
Gilles Deleuze's concept of "empty square" (the sudden lack of an object one 
used to have at hand: sociality in this case), this research highlighted the 
ambivalent nature of identity. Individualization and socialization are the 
"uneven sides" of that same paradoxical object which is identity.

DOI: 10.1080/10401334.2022.2080068
PMID: 35711162
