1. Allergol Int. 2023 Jan;72(1):54-62. doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2022.06.001. Epub 2022
 Jul 2.

Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies with a focus on hereditary angioedema.

Zuraw BL(1), Maurer M(2), Sexton DJ(3), Cicardi M(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California, 
San Diego, CA, USA. Electronic address: bzuraw@health.ucsd.edu.
(2)Institute of Allergology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate 
Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany; Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, 
Allergology and Immunology, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Lexington, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Luigi Sacco, University of 
Milan, IRCCS ICS Maugeri, Milano, Italy.

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been shown to be effective and generally safe 
across a continually expanding list of therapeutic areas. We describe the 
advantages and limitations of mAbs as a therapeutic option compared with small 
molecules. Specifically, we discuss a novel mAb in the treatment of hereditary 
angioedema (HAE), a rare and potentially life-threatening condition 
characterized by recurrent unpredictable swelling attacks. HAE is mediated by 
dysregulation of plasma kallikrein activity leading to overproduction of 
bradykinin. Current prophylactic treatment for HAE includes androgens or 
replacement of the endogenous plasma kallikrein inhibitor, C1 inhibitor. 
However, there remains an unmet need for an effective, less burdensome treatment 
option. Lanadelumab is a fully human mAb targeting plasma kallikrein. Results 
from clinical trials, including a pivotal Phase 3 study and its ensuing 
open-label extension study, demonstrated that lanadelumab is associated with few 
treatment-related adverse events and reduced the rate of HAE attacks. This novel 
treatment option has the potential to significantly improve the lives of 
patients with HAE.

Copyright © 2022 Japanese Society of Allergology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alit.2022.06.001
PMID: 35787344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
