1. Chest. 2023 Jan;163(1):89-99. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.07.004. Epub 2022 Jul 
16.

The Changing Epidemiology of Cystic Fibrosis: The Implications for Adult Care.

Burgel PR(1), Burnet E(2), Regard L(3), Martin C(3).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm, Paris, France; Respiratory 
Medicine and Cystic Fibrosis National Reference Center, Cochin Hospital, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France; ERN-Lung CF 
Network, Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address: pierre-regis.burgel@aphp.fr.
(2)Respiratory Medicine and Cystic Fibrosis National Reference Center, Cochin 
Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(3)Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm, Paris, France; Respiratory 
Medicine and Cystic Fibrosis National Reference Center, Cochin Hospital, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France; ERN-Lung CF 
Network, Frankfurt, Germany.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease in which mutations in the gene 
encoding for the CF transmembrane conductance regulator protein result in a 
multisystem disease dominated by digestive and respiratory manifestations. In 
the mid-20th century, CF caused death within the first years of life. Over the 
past decades, advances in disease management, which includes systematic neonatal 
screening, multidisciplinary symptomatic CF care, lung transplantation and, more 
recently, highly effective CF transmembrane conductance regulator modulators, 
have transformed the prognosis of people with CF markedly. In most countries 
with well-established CF care, adults now outnumber children, and life 
expectancy is expected to increase further, narrowing the survival gap with the 
general population. However, marked differences in the prognosis of CF exist not 
only among high-, low-, and middle-income countries but also among high-income 
countries, based on the presence and quality of a specialized CF care provision 
network. Current evidence suggests that differences in patient clinical status 
and survival could be attributable not only to intrinsic disease severity but 
also to disparities in access to high-quality specialized care. Because CF is 
generally a progressive disease, adults with CF often show increased pulmonary 
severity and complications and increased occurrence of comorbidities, which 
highlights the need for specialized adult CF centers. This article seeks to 
describe the evolution of CF demography over the past decades, predict future 
trends, and anticipate the future provision of adult CF care.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.07.004
PMID: 35850286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
