1. J Endourol. 2023 Jan;37(1):50-59. doi: 10.1089/end.2022.0324. Epub 2022 Sep 9.

Prostatic Urethral Lift for Obstructive Median Lobes: Consistent Results Across 
Controlled Trial and Real-World Settings.

Eure G(1), Rukstalis D(2), Roehrborn C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Urology of Virginia, Virginia Beach, Virginia, USA.
(2)Prisma Health USC Medical Group, Division of Urology, 300 Palmetto Health 
Pkwy, Columbia.
(3)Department of Urology, UT Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Introduction: The evidence for prostatic urethral lift (PUL), in treating lower 
urinary tract symptoms/benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) in men with 
obstructive median lobes (OMLs), has grown. In this study, we present the first 
detailed comparison of outcomes between OML patients treated with PUL in 
controlled and real-world settings to relevant comparators (subjects treated 
with transurethral resection of the prostate [TURP] and sham in randomized 
controlled trials [RCTs]) to demonstrate similar symptom, safety, and patient 
experience outcomes. Materials and Methods: Symptom and safety outcomes and 
patient satisfaction were compared through 12 months among controlled PUL 
studies: BPH6 RCT (35 men randomized to TURP); L.I.F.T. pivotal RCT in subjects 
with lateral lobe obstruction (66 subjects randomized to sham) and MedLift, an 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved Investigational Device Exemption 
(IDE) extension of the L.I.F.T. trial (45 men with OML). Symptom improvement, 
catheterization, and adverse event rates were compared between MedLift subjects 
and OML patients (n = 187) from the large real-world retrospective (RWR) study 
of PUL filtered on baseline characteristics to approximate the MedLift 
population. Results: Posttreatment, International Prostate Symptoms Score (IPSS) 
improvement for MedLift subjects was 170% greater compared with sham at 3 months 
with significantly better quality of life (QoL), Qmax, and benign prostatic 
hyperplasia impact index (BPHII). Compared with TURP, MedLift IPSS and QoL 
improved significantly better at 1 and 3 months and with superior ejaculatory 
function scores at all time points after PUL. IPSS, QoL, postvoid residual 
(PVR), and Qmax outcomes were equivalent between MedLift and RWR OML groups at 
3, 6, and 12 months. RWR OML patients did not experience higher rates of overall 
adverse events compared with MedLift. Conclusion: Controlled and real-world 
outcomes confirm PUL is a safe and effective treatment for BPH patients with and 
without OML.

DOI: 10.1089/end.2022.0324
PMCID: PMC9810349
PMID: 35876440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Drs. Eure, Roehrborn, and Rukstalis are 
NeoTract, Inc./Teleflex consultants.
