1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2023;278:235-247. doi: 10.1007/164_2022_604.

The Plant Vacuole as Heterologous System to Characterize the Functional 
Properties of TPC Channels.

Dietrich P(1), Gradogna A(2), Carpaneto A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Department Biologie 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Institute of Biophysics, Genoa, Italy. armando.carpaneto@unige.it.
(4)Department of Earth, Environment and Life Sciences (DISTAV) - University of 
Genoa, Genoa, Italy. armando.carpaneto@unige.it.

Human TPC channels are an emerging family of intracellular proteins fundamental 
for cell physiology and involved in various severe pathologies. Their 
localization in the membranes of endo-lysosomes, intracellular compartments of 
submicrometric dimensions, makes their study difficult with usual 
electrophysiological techniques. In this work, we show how the plant vacuole, a 
versatile organelle that can occupy up to 90% of the volume in mature plant 
cells, can be used as a heterologous system of expression for functional 
characterization. For this purpose, the use of vacuoles isolated from mesophyll 
cells of the Arabidopsis thaliana mutant lacking the endogenous TPC avoids 
unwanted interferences. The patch-clamp technique can be successfully applied to 
plant vacuoles in all different configuration modes; of note, the whole-vacuole 
configuration allows to study channel modulation by cytosolic factors. The 
combination of patch-clamp with fluorescence techniques, for example, by using 
fluorescent probes sensitive to specific ions of interest, represents a useful 
extension to investigate the selectivity properties of the channels. Therefore, 
the plant vacuole, similar to Xenopus oocytes for ion channels and transporters 
localized in the plasma membrane, has the capability to become a model system 
for functional studies on intracellular ion channels and transporters.

© 2022. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2022_604
PMID: 35879579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
