1. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2023 Jan 1;43(1):22-30. doi: 
10.1097/HCR.0000000000000705. Epub 2022 Jul 25.

A Community-Informed Virtual World-Based Cardiac Rehabilitation Program as an 
Extension of Center-Based Cardiac Rehabilitation: MIXED-METHODS ANALYSIS OF A 
MULTICENTER PILOT STUDY.

Brewer LC(1), Abraham H, Kaihoi B, Leth S, Egginton J, Slusser J, Scott C, 
Penheiter S, Albertie M, Squires R, Thomas R, Scales R, Trejo-Gutierrez J, 
Kopecky S.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Cardiovascular Medicine (Drs Brewer, Squires, Thomas, and 
Kopecky and Ms Leth) and Internal Medicine (Dr Abraham), Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota; Center for Health Equity and Community 
Engagement Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (Drs Brewer, and 
Penheiter); Global Products and Services, Mayo Clinic Center for Innovation, 
Rochester, Minnesota (Mr Kaihoi); Center for the Science of Health Care 
Delivery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota (Mr Egginton); 
Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Division of Clinical Trials and 
Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (Messrs Slusser and Scott); 
Center for Health Equity and Community Engagement Research, Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, Florida (Ms Albertie); Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic College of Medicine, Scottsdale, Arizona (Dr Scales); and Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, Florida 
(Dr Trejo-Gutierrez).

PURPOSE: Innovative methods for delivering cardiac rehabilitation (CR) that 
provide strategies to circumvent the mounting barriers to traditional CR have 
the potential to widen access to a well-established secondary prevention 
strategy. Our study assesses the feasibility and acceptability of a novel 
virtual world-based CR (VWCR) program, Destination Rehab , as an extension of a 
conventional center-based CR program.
METHODS: Adult cardiac patients hospitalized at Mayo Clinic hospitals with a 
diagnosis for CR and ≥1 modifiable, lifestyle risk factor target-sedentary 
lifestyle (<3 hr physical activity/wk), unhealthy diet (<5 servings fruits and 
vegetables/d), or current smoking (>1 yr)-were recruited. Patients participated 
in an 8-wk health education program using a virtual world (VW) platform from a 
prior proof-of-concept study and a post-intervention focus group. Primary 
outcome measures included feasibility and acceptability. Secondary outcome 
measures included changes from baseline to post-intervention in cardiovascular 
(CV) health behaviors and biometrics, CV health knowledge, and psychosocial 
factors.
RESULTS: Of the 30 enrolled patients (age 59.1 ± 9.7 yr; 50% women), 93% 
attended ≥1 session and 71% attended ≥75% of sessions. The overall VWCR 
experience received an 8 rating (scale 0-10) and had high acceptability. 
Clinically relevant trends were noted in CV health behaviors and biometrics, 
although not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The VWCR program is a feasible, highly acceptable, and innovative 
platform to potentially influence health behaviors and CV risk and may increase 
accessibility to disadvantaged populations with higher CV disease burdens.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/HCR.0000000000000705
PMCID: PMC10340723
PMID: 35881503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
