1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Mar 30;78(4):683-689. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac159.

Characteristics Associated With 5-Year Fracture Risk Versus 5-Year Mortality 
Risk Among Late-Life Men.

Langsetmo L(1), Schousboe JT(2)(3), Taylor BC(1)(4), Cauley JA(5), Fink 
HA(1)(4)(6), Cawthon PM(7), Stefanick ML(8), Kado DM(8)(9), Kats AM(10), Ensrud 
KE(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Care Delivery and Outcomes Research, VA Health Care System, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)HealthPartners Institute, Bloomington, MN, USA.
(3)Division of Health Policy & Management, School of Public Health, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, 
University of Minnesota , Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Center for Care Delivery and Outcomes Research and Geriatric Research 
Education and Clinical Center, VA Health Care System, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(7)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute , San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Health Care System , 
Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(10)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Identifying late-life men who might benefit from treatment to 
prevent fracture is challenging given high mortality. Our objective was to 
evaluate risks of clinical fracture, hip fracture, and mortality prior to 
fracture among men aged at least 80 years.
METHODS: Study participants included 3 145 community-dwelling men (mean 
[standard deviation] age 83 [2.8] years) from the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men 
(MrOS) Study. We used separate multivariable Fine-Gray competing risk models 
with prespecified risk factors (age, hip bone mineral density [BMD], recent 
fracture [<5 years], fall history [previous year], and multimorbidity [# 
conditions]) to estimate subdistribution hazard ratios and absolute 5-year risks 
of any clinical fracture and mortality prior to clinical fracture. Secondary 
analysis considered a hip fracture.
RESULTS: There were 414 incident clinical fractures and 595 deaths without prior 
fracture within 5 years. BMD, fall history, and recent fracture were strong 
predictors of clinical fracture. Age and multimorbidity were strong predictors 
of mortality before fracture. After accounting for competing risks, age, BMD, 
and fall history were each associated with both risks of hip fracture and 
mortality before hip fracture. Model discrimination varied from 0.65 (mortality 
before fracture) to 0.79 (hip fracture). Estimated mortality differed 
substantially among men with similar clinical fracture risk due to a modest 
correlation between fracture risk and competing mortality risk = 0.37.
CONCLUSION: In late-life men, strong risk factors for clinical fracture and hip 
fracture include fall history, BMD, and recent fracture. Osteoporosis drug 
treatment decisions may be further enhanced by consideration of fracture risk 
versus overall life expectancy.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Gerontological Society of 
America 2022.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac159
PMCID: PMC10061558
PMID: 35917212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.M.K. reports receiving royalties from 
UpToDate. The other authors have nothing to declare.
