1. J Clin Nurs. 2023 Jul;32(13-14):3656-3671. doi: 10.1111/jocn.16474. Epub 2022 
Aug 1.

The impact of ageing simulation education on qualified acute care nurses' 
empathy towards older people: A mixed-methods study.

Bowden A(1)(2)(3), Wilson V(1)(2)(3), Traynor V(1)(3), Chang HR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, School of Nursing, University of 
Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District, Wollongong, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute (IHMRI), Wollongong, New 
South Wales, Australia.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the influence of an ageing simulation 
intervention on qualified acute care nurses' empathy towards older people.
BACKGROUND: Life expectancy is increasing globally with an increased incidence 
of older people accessing healthcare services. As such, it is essential for 
qualified nurses within hospital settings to connect with older people by 
establishing healthful relationships. Empathy is an essential component of 
healthful nurse-patient relationships. Fortunately, empathy can be taught 
through education.
DESIGN: A convergent mixed-methods design was utilised.
METHODS: Nurses (N = 95) undertook an 8-hour ageing simulation intervention. 
Data were collected from April 2019 to May 2020 across three time points: before 
the intervention (T0); immediately after (T1) and at three months follow-up 
(T2). A mix of convenience (intervention) and purposeful (follow-up) sampling 
techniques were utilised. Quantitative data were collected via the Interpersonal 
Reactivity Index survey (n = 86) and analysed using repeat measures ANOVA to 
compare mean scores across time points. Qualitative data were collected via 
debriefing discussions (N = 95) and focus groups (n = 38), and analysed using a 
systematic thematic analysis method. Data convergence occurred during the 
interpretation phase. Study reported with the TREND checklist.
RESULTS: Primarily, when quantitative and qualitative findings were merged they 
confirmed each others' empathy outcomes. Quantitative results showed a 
statistically significant increase in affective and cognitive empathy levels 
among nurses post-intervention. Qualitative findings expanded on quantitative 
results and revealed an increase in nurses' affective, cognitive and behavioural 
empathy represented in themes 'enhancing my empathy', 'impact of ageing', 'from 
self to others' and 'person-centred moments'.
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds empirical evidence how a mixed-methods design can 
be used to evaluate the influence of an ageing simulation intervention on 
nurses' empathy levels.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Ageing simulation interventions are a suitable 
experiential educational approach to improve acute care nurses' affective, 
cognitive and behavioural empathy towards older people.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Nursing published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.16474
PMID: 35915585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
