1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2024;20(1):2-26. doi: 10.2174/1573396318666220801093225.

Childhood Obesity: An Updated Review.

Leung AKC(1), Wong AHC(2), Hon KL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, The Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, The University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Childhood obesity is an important and serious public health problem 
worldwide.
OBJECTIVE: This article aims to familiarize physicians with the evaluation, 
management, and prevention of childhood.
METHODS: A PubMed search was conducted in May, 2021, in Clinical Queries using 
the key terms "obesity" OR "obese". The search included clinical trials, 
randomized controlled trials, case-control studies, cohort studies, 
meta-analyses, observational studies, clinical guidelines, case reports, case 
series, and reviews. The search was restricted to English literature and 
children. The information retrieved from the above search was used in the 
compilation of the present article.
RESULTS: Most obese children have exogenous obesity characterized by a growth 
rate for height above the 50th percentile, normal intelligence, normal 
genitalia, and lack of historical or physical evidence of an endocrine 
abnormality or a congenital syndrome. Obese children are at risk for 
dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease, obstructive sleep apnea, psychosocial disturbances, impaired quality of 
life, and shorter life expectancy. The multitude of serious comorbidities 
necessitates effective treatment modalities. Dietary modification, therapeutic 
exercise, and behavioral modification are the fundamentals of treatment. 
Pharmacotherapy and/or bariatric surgery should be considered for obese 
individuals who do not respond to the above measures and suffer from a serious 
comorbid condition.
CONCLUSION: Childhood obesity, once established, is often refractory to 
treatment. Most treatment programs lead to a brief period of weight loss, 
followed by rapid re-accumulation of the lost weight after the termination of 
therapy. As such, preventive activity is the key to solving the problem of 
childhood obesity. Childhood obesity can be prevented by promoting a healthy 
diet, regular physical activity, and lifestyle modification. Parents should be 
encouraged to get involved in school and community programs that improve their 
children's nutritional status and physical activity.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396318666220801093225
PMID: 35927921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
