1. Dermatology. 2023;239(1):148-157. doi: 10.1159/000525974. Epub 2022 Aug 25.

Influence of Frailty and Life Expectancy on Guideline Adherence and Outcomes in 
Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck: A Prospective Pilot 
Study.

Leus AJG(1), Haisma MS(1), Terra JB(1), Sidorenkov G(2), Festen S(3), Plaat 
BEC(4), Halmos GB(4), Racz E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma is the second most common 
malignancy of the skin, often occurring in older patients and in the head and 
neck area (cSCCHN). Age, life expectancy, and frailty are not taken into 
consideration by current guidelines.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of frailty 
and life expectancy on guideline deviation, treatment outcomes, and quality of 
life (QoL) after treatment in patients with cSCCHN.
METHODS: Patients with cSCCHN were prospectively included. A geriatric 
assessment was performed, including the Geriatric 8 (G8), Groningen Frailty 
Indicator, and Timed Up and Go test (TUG). The Lee index was used to predict a 
limited life expectancy, and the Adult Comorbidity Evaluation-27 was used as a 
comorbidity index. QoL was assessed by the Basal and Squamous cell carcinoma 
Quality of Life (BaSQoL) questionnaire at three time points.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven patients with cSCCHN were included. Frail patients had 
significantly more high-risk tumours. Guideline deviation occurred in 7.8% and 
was more common in patients who were frail (G8), with high-risk tumours (≥T2), 
with a limited life expectancy or an increased TUG. Guideline deviation did not 
lead more often to progression of disease in our study. No predictors for 
post-operative complications were found. BaSQoL subscores were very low at each 
time point and did not change significantly with time in the total group. Frail 
patients reported more fear of recurrence or new tumours 3 months after 
treatment, and less concern about other people's skin 6 months after treatment, 
compared to non-frail patients. Complication rate, gender, or guideline 
deviation did not affect any subscale scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Assessment of frailty and life expectancy can guide physicians and 
patients in treatment decisions. Deviation from guidelines towards less 
aggressive treatment schedules can be considered in frail patients with a 
limited life expectancy, since it did not negatively affect short-term outcomes 
or QoL in patients with cSCCHN in our study. However, these results should be 
confirmed by other, larger prospective studies with a longer follow-up period.

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000525974
PMID: 36007491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
