1. Health Promot J Austr. 2023 Feb;34(1):129-137. doi: 10.1002/hpja.651. Epub
2022  Aug 24.

Young women's engagement with gambling: A critical qualitative inquiry of risk 
conceptualisations and motivations to gamble.

McCarthy S(1), Thomas S(2), Pitt H(2), Marko S(2), Randle M(3), Cowlishaw S(4), 
Kairouz S(5), Daube M(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Transformation, Faculty of Health, Deakin University, 
Geelong, Vic., Australia.
(2)Institute for Health Transformation, Deakin University, Geelong, Vic., 
Australia.
(3)Faculty of Business and Law, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic., 
Australia.
(5)Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(6)Faculty of Health Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Younger women's engagement with gambling has changed over recent 
decades due to a range of socio-cultural, environmental and commercial factors. 
However, younger women's distinct lived experiences with gambling have rarely 
been considered. The following critical qualitative inquiry explored factors 
that influenced younger women's engagement with gambling and their perceptions 
of gambling risks.
METHODS: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 41 Australian women aged 
18-40 years. Participants were asked questions relating to their reasons for 
gambling, and the perceived risks associated with gambling. Reflexive thematic 
analysis was used to interpret the data.
RESULTS: Five themes were constructed from the data. First, women reported that 
they gambled to escape their everyday lives, with some women reporting gambling 
within their own homes. Second, women reported gambling for financial reasons, 
particularly to change their life circumstances and outcomes. Third, gambling 
was used by women as a way to connect with social network members. Fourth, 
gambling was an incidental activity that was an extension of non-gambling 
leisure activities. Finally, lower risk perceptions of participants' own 
gambling risk contributed to their engagement and continuation of gambling.
CONCLUSION: Public health and health promotion initiatives should recognise that 
young women's gambling practices are diverse, and address the full range of 
socio-cultural, environmental and commercial factors that may influence younger 
women's engagement with gambling.

© 2022 The Authors. Health Promotion Journal of Australia published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian Health Promotion 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/hpja.651
PMCID: PMC10087406
PMID: 36002940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest but 
have a range of declarations. Simone McCarthy has received an Australian 
Government Research Training Program stipend from Deakin University for her PhD 
related to gambling and women. Samantha Thomas has received funding for gambling 
research from the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant Scheme, the 
Victorian Responsible Gambling Foundation, Healthway, and the New South Wales 
Office of Responsible Gambling. She has received travel expenses for gambling 
speaking engagements from the European Union, Beat the Odds Wales, the Office of 
Gaming and Racing ACT, SNSUS (Stiftelsen Nordiska Sällskapet för Upplysning om 
Spelberoende) and the Royal College of Psychiatry Wales. She is a member of the 
Responsible Gambling Advisory Board for LotteryWest. She does not receive any 
financial compensation for this role. Hannah Pitt has received funding for 
gambling research from the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant Scheme, 
VicHealth, Deakin University, the Victorian Responsible Gambling Foundation and 
the New South Wales Office of Responsible Gambling. Sarah Marko has received 
support for gambling research from an Australian Government Research Training 
Program Scholarship. Melanie Randle has received funding for gambling research 
from the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant Scheme and the Victorian 
Responsible Gambling Foundation. Sean Cowlishaw currently receives funding from 
the Australian Research Council and the Victorian Responsible Gambling 
Foundation for gambling‐related research. He has also received funding for 
mental health research from the National Health and Medical Research Council, 
the National Mental Health Commission, the Victorian Department of Health, the 
Victorian Department of Education & Training, The Teacher's Health Foundation, 
the State Trustees Australia Foundation, the Commonwealth Department of 
Veteran's Affairs and the Defence Health Foundation. Sean Cowlishaw has not 
knowingly received funding from the gambling industry or any industry sponsored 
organisation. He has participated in scholarly and policy related conferences 
and events which were sponsored by industry, but received no payment for 
involvement or expenses. Sylvia Kairouz has no competing financial interests to 
declare. She holds a Research Chair on Gambling funded by the Fonds de Recherche 
du Québec – Société et Culture (FRQ‐SC) and the Mise‐sur‐toi foundation. She 
received funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the 
John Evans Leadership fund of the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, and the 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). Mike Daube 
has received funding for gambling research from the Australian Research Council 
Discovery Grant Scheme and the Victorian Responsible Gambling Foundation Grants 
Scheme.
