1. Drugs Aging. 2009;26(9):715-37. doi: 10.2165/11316480-000000000-00000.

Immunotherapy in elderly transplant recipients: a guide to clinically 
significant drug interactions.

Kuypers DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, University Hospitals of 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Dirk.Kuypers@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Currently, >50% of candidates for solid organ transplantation in Europe and the 
US are aged >50 years while approximately 15% of potential recipients are aged 
>or=65 years. Elderly transplant candidates are characterized by specific 
co-morbidity profiles that compromise graft and patient outcome after 
transplantation. The presence of coronary artery or peripheral vascular disease, 
cerebrovascular disease, history of malignancy, chronic obstructive lung disease 
or diabetes mellitus further increases the early post-transplant mortality risk 
in elderly recipients, with infections and cardiovascular complications as the 
leading causes of death. Not only are elderly patients more prone to developing 
drug-related adverse effects, but they are also more susceptible to 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interactions because of polypharmacy. 
The majority of currently used immunosuppressant drugs in organ transplantation 
are metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) or uridine 
diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases and are substrates of the multidrug 
resistance (MDR)-1 transporter P-glycoprotein, the MDR-associated protein 2 or 
the canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter, which predisposes these 
immunosuppressant compounds to specific interactions with commonly prescribed 
drugs. In addition, important drug interactions between immunosuppressant drugs 
have been identified and require attention when choosing an appropriate 
immunosuppressant drug regimen for the frail elderly organ recipient. An 
age-related 34% decrease in total body clearance of the calcineurin inhibitor 
ciclosporin was observed in elderly renal recipients (aged >65 years) compared 
with younger patients, while older recipients also had 44% higher intracellular 
lymphocyte ciclosporin concentrations. Similarly, using a Bayesian approach, an 
inverse relationship was noted between sirolimus clearance and age in stable 
kidney recipients. Ciclosporin and tacrolimus have distinct pharmacokinetics, 
but both are metabolized by intestinal and hepatic CYP3A4/3A5 and transported 
across the cell membrane by P-glycoprotein. The most common drug interactions 
with ciclosporin are therefore also observed with tacrolimus, but the two drugs 
do not interact identically when administered with CYP3A inhibitors or inducers. 
The strongest effects on calcineurin-inhibitor disposition are observed with 
azole antifungals, macrolide antibacterials, rifampicin, calcium channel 
antagonists, grapefruit juice, St John's wort and protease inhibitors. Drug 
interactions with mycophenolic acids occur mainly through inhibition of their 
enterohepatic recirculation, either by interference with the intestinal flora 
(antibacterials) or by limiting drug absorption (resins and binders). Rifampicin 
causes a reduction in mycophenolic acid exposure probably through induction of 
uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases. Proliferation signal inhibitors 
(PSIs) such as sirolimus and everolimus are substrates of CYP3A4 and 
P-glycoprotein and have a macrolide structure very similar to tacrolimus, which 
explains why common drug interactions with PSIs are comparable to those with 
calcineurin inhibitors. Ciclosporin, in contrast to tacrolimus, inhibits the 
enterohepatic recirculation of mycophenolic acids, resulting in significantly 
lower concentrations and hence risk of underexposure. Therefore, when switching 
from tacrolimus to ciclosporin and vice versa or when reducing or withdrawing 
ciclosporin, this interaction needs to be taken into account. The combination of 
ciclosporin with PSIs requires dose reductions of both drugs because of a 
synergistic interaction that causes nephrotoxicity when left uncorrected. 
Conversely, when switching between calcineurin inhibitors, intensified 
monitoring of PSI concentrations is mandatory. Increasing age is associated with 
structural and functional changes in body compartments and tissues that alter 
absorptive capacity, volume of distribution, hepatic metabolic function and 
renal function and ultimately drug disposition. While these age-related changes 
are well-known, few specific effects of the latter on immunosuppressant drug 
metabolism have been reported. Therefore, more clinical data from elderly organ 
recipients are urgently required.

DOI: 10.2165/11316480-000000000-00000
PMID: 19728747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
