1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Nov;28(11):2392-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1976.

Metabolic regulation of osteoclast differentiation and function.

Indo Y(1), Takeshita S, Ishii KA, Hoshii T, Aburatani H, Hirao A, Ikeda K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bone and Joint Disease, National Center for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, Obu, Aichi, Japan.

The osteoclast is a giant cell that resorbs calcified matrix by secreting acids 
and collagenolytic enzymes. The molecular mechanisms underlying metabolic 
adaptation to the increased biomass and energetic demands of osteoclastic bone 
resorption remain elusive. Here we show that during osteoclastogenesis the 
expression of both glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) and glycolytic genes is 
increased, whereas the knockdown of hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (Hif1α), as 
well as glucose deprivation, inhibits the bone-resorbing function of 
osteoclasts, along with a suppression of Glut1 and glycolytic gene expression. 
Furthermore, the expression of the glutamine transporter solute carrier family 1 
(neutral amino acid transporter), member 5 (Slc1a5) and glutaminase 1 was 
increased early in differentiation, and a depletion of L-glutamine or 
pharmacological inhibition of the Slc1a5 transporter suppressed osteoclast 
differentiation and function. Inhibition of c-Myc function abrogated osteoclast 
differentiation and function, along with a suppression of Slc1a5 and glutaminase 
1 gene expression. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR), as well as the activation of adenosine monophosphate 
(AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK), inhibited osteoclastogenesis. Thus, the 
uptake of glucose and glutamine and utilization of the carbon sources derived 
from them, coordinated by HIF1α and c-Myc, are essential for osteoclast 
development and bone-resorbing activity through a balanced regulation of the 
nutrient and energy sensors, mTOR and AMPK.

© 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1976
PMID: 23661628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
