1. Glycogen Storage Disease Type I.

Bali DS(1), El-Gharbawy A(1), Austin S(2), Pendyal S(1), Kishnani PS(1).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2006 Apr 19 [updated 2021 Oct 14].

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics Department of Pediatrics Duke University Medical 
Center Durham, North Carolina
(2)Medical Science Liaison (Southeast); Associate Director Amicus Therapeutics, 
Inc Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Glycogen storage disease type I (GSDI) is 
characterized by accumulation of glycogen and fat in the liver and kidneys 
resulting in hepatomegaly and nephromegaly. Severely affected infants present in 
the neonatal period with severe hypoglycemia due to fasting intolerance. More 
commonly, untreated infants present at age three to four months with 
hepatomegaly, severe hypoglycemia with or without seizures, lactic acidosis, 
hyperuricemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. Affected children typically have 
doll-like faces with full cheeks, relatively thin extremities, short stature, 
and a protuberant abdomen. Xanthoma and diarrhea may be present. Impaired 
platelet function and development of reduced or dysfunctional von Willebrand 
factor can lead to a bleeding tendency with frequent epistaxis and menorrhagia 
in females. Individuals with untreated GSDIb are more likely to develop impaired 
neutrophil and monocyte function as well as chronic neutropenia resulting in 
recurrent bacterial infections, gingivitis, periodontitis, and genital and 
intestinal ulcers. Long-term complications of untreated GSDI include short 
stature, osteoporosis, delayed puberty, renal disease (including proximal and 
distal renal tubular acidosis, renal stones, and renal failure), gout, systemic 
hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, hepatic adenomas with potential for 
malignancy, pancreatitis, and polycystic ovaries. Seizures and cognitive 
impairment may occur in individuals with prolonged periods of hypoglycemia. 
Normal growth and puberty are expected in treated children. Most affected 
individuals live into adulthood.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GSDI is established in a proband by 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in either G6PC1 (GSDIa) or 
SLC37A4 (GSDIb). If molecular genetic testing is inconclusive, hepatic enzyme 
activity analysis is only available for glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic activity 
(GSDIa).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Uncooked cornstarch alternating with 
frequent meals and snacks high in complex carbohydrates as directed by a 
metabolic specialist and metabolic dietitian to maintain normal blood glucose 
levels, prevent hypoglycemia, and provide optimal nutrition for growth and 
development. Nutritional supplements to avoid deficiencies. Surgery or other 
interventions such as percutaneous ethanol injections and radiofrequency 
ablation for hepatic adenomas; liver transplantation for individuals refractory 
to medical treatment. Other treatments include lipid-lowering medications for 
hyperlipidemia, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to treat 
microalbuminuria, allopurinol to prevent and/or treat gout, citrate 
supplementation to prevent urinary calculi or ameliorate nephrocalcinosis, 
kidney transplantation for end-stage renal disease, and combined renal and liver 
transplant when needed. Management of hypertension with avoidance of beta 
blockers; standard treatment of pancreatitis; developmental support and 
treatment of seizures as needed, antifibrinolytics and deamino-8-d-arginine 
vasopressin as needed for bleeding diathesis. Human granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for neutropenia, recurrent infections, 
enterocolitis and bowel ulcers. Management of polycystic ovaries and/or 
irregular menstrual cycles per gynecologist. Thyroid supplementation for 
hypothyroidism. Social worker or counselor for discussion and coping with 
chronic disease and possible body image considerations. Surveillance: Home blood 
glucose monitoring using a glucometer or continuous glucose monitoring; liver 
ultrasound every 12 to 24 months until age 16 years; liver CT, ultrasound, or 
MRI with contrast every six to 12 months in individuals beginning at age 16 
years or earlier in individuals with hepatic adenomas; growth and nutritional 
assessment at each visit; surveillance labs to assess liver function, nutrition, 
and renal function including blood glucose, lactate, lipid panel, serum uric 
acid, comprehensive metabolic panel (including BUN, creatinine, AST, ALT, 
bilirubin, albumin, and electrolytes) every six to 12 months; PT/INR and aPTT 
every six months. Assess for anemia including CBC, iron, TIBC, and ferritin 
every six to 12 months; CBC with differential count (including WBC with ANC) 
every three months for those on G-CSF; serum CRP, ESR, TSH, and free T4 levels 
annually. Bone density every one to two years and serum 25(OH)-vitamin D 
annually; renal ultrasound annually beginning at age ten years; blood pressure 
at each visit; developmental assessment as indicated; evaluation by a 
gastroenterologist when indicated; colonoscopy when indicated. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoid sucrose, galactose, fructose, high fructose 
corn syrup, honey, maple syrup, molasses, agave nectar, and sorbitol. Combined 
oral contraception (including high-dose estrogen) should be avoided in women, 
particularly those with adenomas. Metformin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, and 
lactate-containing infusions such as Ringer’s lactate should be avoided. 
Glucagon should not be used to treat hypoglycemia. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are 
known) and/or evaluation by a metabolic physician soon after birth (if the 
family-specific pathogenic variants are not known) allows for early diagnosis 
and treatment of sibs at risk for GSDI.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GSDI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a GSDI-causing pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Heterozygotes (carriers) are asymptomatic. Carrier 
testing for at-risk family members, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at 
increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if both 
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301489
