1. SHORT Syndrome.

Innes AM(1), Dyment DA(2).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2014 May 15 [updated 2020 Jun 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary;, Alberta Children's 
Hospital Research Institute for Child and Maternal Health, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada
(2)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SHORT syndrome is a mnemonic for short stature, 
hyperextensibility, ocular depression (deeply set eyes), Rieger anomaly, and 
teething delay. It is now recognized that the features most consistently 
observed in SHORT syndrome are mild intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR); mild 
to moderate short stature; partial lipodystrophy (evident in the face, and later 
in the chest and upper extremities, often sparing the buttocks and legs); and a 
characteristic facial gestalt. Insulin resistance may be evident in 
mid-childhood or adolescence, although diabetes mellitus typically does not 
develop until early adulthood. Other frequent features include Axenfeld-Rieger 
anomaly or related ocular anterior chamber dysgenesis, delayed dentition and 
other dental issues, and sensorineural hearing loss.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SHORT syndrome is established in a proband 
with compatible clinical features (with emphasis on the facial gestalt) and a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in PIK3R1 identified by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Glaucoma: reduce and stabilize 
intraocular pressure and to preserve vision. Sensorineural hearing loss: use of 
hearing aids. Dental anomalies: standard treatment; may include crowns and 
dental prostheses. Glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus: to be followed by 
an endocrine specialist. Surveillance: Regular monitoring of growth including 
height, weight, and body mass index. For all individuals with and without 
apparent anterior chamber anomaly: routine eye examinations to include 
measurement of intraocular pressure. Hearing assessment every two to three 
years. Screening for insulin resistance by oral glucose tolerance test every 
five years in the absence of diabetes. Annual screening lab tests for diabetes 
mellitus beginning after age ten years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Administration of human growth hormone as it may exacerbate insulin resistance. 
One individual with SHORT syndrome had worsening insulin resistance when treated 
with metformin; additional study is needed to determine the effects of this 
drug. Pregnancy management: If present, diabetes mellitus is managed as 
appropriate.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SHORT syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
The proportion of individuals with SHORT syndrome caused by a de novo pathogenic 
variant is unknown but appears to be significant. Each child of an individual 
with SHORT syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 24830046
