1. Oral and Injectable (Non-Insulin) Pharmacological Agents for the Treatment of 
Type 2 Diabetes.

Feingold KR(1).

In: Feingold KR(2), Anawalt B(3), Blackman MR(4), Boyce A(5), Chrousos G(6), 
Corpas E(7), de Herder WW(8), Dhatariya K(9), Dungan K(10), Hofland J(11), Kalra 
S(12), Kaltsas G(13), Kapoor N(14), Koch C(15), Kopp P(16), Korbonits M(17), 
Kovacs CS(18), Kuohung W(19), Laferrère B(20), Levy M(21), McGee EA(22), 
McLachlan R(23), New M(24), Purnell J(25), Sahay R(26), Shah AS(27), Singer 
F(28), Sperling MA(29), Stratakis CA(30), Trence DL(31), Wilson DP(32), editors. 
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2022 Aug 26.

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(2)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(3)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(4)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(5)Pediatric Endocrinologist and Associate Research Physician in the Skeletal 
Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health
(6)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(7)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(8)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(9)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(10)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(11)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(12)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(13)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(14)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(15)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(16)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(17)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(18)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(19)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(20)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(21)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(22)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(23)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(24)Professor of Pediatrics, Professor of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and 
Chief of the Adrenal Steroid Disorders Program, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
(25)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(26)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(27)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(28)Director of the Endocrine/Bone Disease Program, Saint Johns Cancer Institute 
at Saint John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; Clinical Professor of Medicine, 
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
(29)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(30)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(31)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(32)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

While lifestyle changes such as dietary modification and increased physical 
activity can be very effective in improving glycemic control, over the long-term 
most individuals with Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) will require medications to achieve 
and maintain glycemic control. The purpose of this chapter is to provide the 
healthcare practitioner with an overview of the existing oral and injectable 
(non-insulin) pharmacological options available for the treatment of patients 
with T2DM. Currently, there are ten classes of orally available pharmacological 
agents to treat T2DM: 1) sulfonylureas, 2) meglitinides, 3) metformin (a 
biguanide), 4) thiazolidinediones (TZDs), 5) alpha glucosidase inhibitors, 6) 
dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-4) inhibitors, 7) bile acid sequestrants, 8) 
dopamine agonists, 9) sodium-glucose transport protein 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and 
10) oral glucagon like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists. In addition, 
glucagon like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, dual GLP-1 receptor and GIP 
receptor agonists, and amylin can be administered by injection. Medications from 
these distinct classes of pharmaceutical agents may be used as treatment by 
themselves (monotherapy) or in a combination of 2 or more drugs from multiple 
classes with different mechanisms of action. A variety of fixed combinations of 
2 agents are available in the US and in many other countries. In this chapter we 
discuss the administration, mechanism of action, effect on glycemic control, 
other benefits, side effects, and the contraindications of the use of these 
glucose lowering drugs. For complete coverage of all related areas of 
Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2023, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 25905364
