1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2020 Apr;128(4):224-230. doi:
10.1055/a-0824-6607.  Epub 2019 Jan 22.

Real-World Adequacy of Glycaemic Control in Treatment-Naïve Greek Patients with 
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Initiating Treatment with Metformin Monotherapy at the 
Maximum Tolerated Dose: The Reload Study.

Tsimihodimos V(1), Bargiota A(2), Pagkalos EM(3), Manes C(4), Papas A(5), 
Karamousouli E(6), Voss B(7), Elisaf MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina, 
Ioannina, Greece.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Thessaly 
School of Medicine, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Private Hospital Thermi Clinic, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Diabetes Center, Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Diabetes Center, Venizelio General Hospital Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(6)Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Athens, Greece.
(7)MSD RBSC, Lindenplatz 1, Haar Deutschland, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Metformin, in the absence of contraindications or intolerance, is 
recommended as first-line treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM). This observational, retrospective study assessed the real-world adequacy 
of glycaemic control in Greek patients with T2DM initiating metformin 
monotherapy at maximum tolerated dose.
METHODS: Included patients received metformin monotherapy for ≥24 months; 
relevant patient data were collected immediately prior to metformin initiation 
(baseline) and at other prespecified time points. The primary objective was to 
report, after 9 months of metformin treatment, the percentage of patients with 
baseline glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) levels ≥6.5% (≥48 mmol/mol) achieving 
HbA1c<6.5%. Secondary objectives included the assessment of time spent with poor 
glycaemic control and time to treatment intensification. A sensitivity analysis 
assessed the percentage of patients with baseline HbA1c≥7% (≥53 mmol/mol) 
achieving HbA1c<7% (<53 mmol/mol).
RESULTS: Of the enrolled patients (N=316), 247 had baseline HbA1c ≥6.5%; 
following 9 months on metformin, 90 (36.4%) patients achieved HbA1c<6.5% (mean 
HbA1c change-1.3% [-14 mmol/mol]). Median time of exposure to HbA1c ≥6.5% was 
23.4 months and time to treatment intensification was 28.0 months. The 
sensitivity analysis revealed that the proportion of patients achieving 
HbA1c<7.0% was 50% (mean HbA1cpy for up to 24 months. Addressing clinical 
inertia could improve disease outcomes and, possibly, economic burden.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0824-6607
PMID: 30669167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Karamousouli and Dr Voss are MSD employees. 
Prof Tsimihodimos reports honoraria and research grants from Elpen, Servier, 
MSD, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and Novo Nordisc. 
Prof Bargiota reports no conflict of interest. Dr Pagkalos reports contribution 
in lectures, clinical trials, advisory boards for the following companies: MSD, 
Sanofi, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisc, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, GSK, 
WinMedica, Novartis, ELPEN. Dr Manes reports grants from Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, 
Vianex, MSD, AstraZeneca, Boheringer Ingelheim, ELPEN, Galenica and Angelini. Dr 
Pappas reports honoraria for advisory boards from MSD, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi 
and honoraria for lectures from MSD, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, 
Vianex, ELPEN, Eli Lilly, Medtronic and AstraZeneca. Prof Elisaf reports 
honoraria from MSD, Novartis, Chiesi, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Abbott, Mylan, 
Sanofi, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, GSK, Angelini, WinMedica and 
grants and personal fees from MSD and AstraZeneca. Professor MS Elisaf has given 
talks and attended conferences sponsored by various pharmaceutical companies, 
including Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Chiesi, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, 
Abbott, Mylan, Sanofi, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, GSK, Angelini, 
WinMedica and MSD.
