1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Jan 1;75(1):102-109. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glz078.

Rationale and Study Design of a Randomized Clinical Trial of Metformin to 
Prevent Frailty in Older Adults With Prediabetes.

Espinoza SE(1)(2)(3), Musi N(2)(3)(4), Wang CP(2)(3)(5), Michalek J(5), Orsak 
B(2)(3)(4), Romo T(2)(3), Powers B(1)(3), Conde A(2)(3), Moris M(2)(3), 
Bair-Kelps D(2)(3), Li Y(2)(3), Ganapathy V(2)(3), Jergensen TE(2)(3), Kelly 
LC(2)(3), Jiwani R(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics, Gerontology, and Palliative Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas.
(2)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas.
(3)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans 
Health Care System, San Antonio, Texas.
(4)Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, Texas.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Texas.
(6)School of Nursing, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 
Texas.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a geriatric syndrome that leads to poor health outcomes 
with aging. Previous studies have demonstrated that insulin resistance and 
inflammation predict frailty onset. Metformin is a widely used, well-tolerated 
drug that improves insulin sensitivity and displays anti-inflammatory 
properties. It is also known to prevent diabetes onset in adults with 
prediabetes. We hypothesize that metformin in older adults with prediabetes will 
promote healthy aging and prevent frailty. Here we describe an ongoing 
placebo-controlled, double-blinded clinical trial of metformin for the 
prevention of frailty in older adults with prediabetes.
METHODS: Older adults aged more than 65 years are randomized to metformin or 
placebo and are followed for 2 years. Prediabetes, required for inclusion, is 
assessed by 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test. Exclusion criteria are baseline 
frailty (Fried criteria), diabetes, dementia, untreated depression, active 
malignancy, or severe cardiovascular, pulmonary, and neurologic diseases. 
Primary outcome is frailty; secondary outcomes are physical function (Short 
Physical Performance Battery), systemic and skeletal muscle tissue inflammation, 
muscle insulin signaling, insulin sensitivity (insulin clamp), glucose tolerance 
(oral glucose tolerance test), and body composition (dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry). Subjects are followed every 3 months for safety assessments and 
every 6 months for frailty assessment (Fried criteria) and oral glucose 
tolerance test, and every 12 or 24 months for secondary outcomes. Enrollment of 
120 subjects (completers) will take place over a 2-year period.
CONCLUSION: Metformin is being examined in this study as a potential therapeutic 
agent to prevent frailty in older adults with prediabetes. Findings from this 
trial may have future implications for the screening and potential treatment of 
prediabetes in older patients with metformin for the prevention of frailty.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Gerontological Society of 
America 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glz078
PMCID: PMC7175970
PMID: 30888034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
