1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 Mar 25;250:111965. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.111965. Epub
 2019 Jun 8.

Liuwei Dihuang Pills alleviate the polycystic ovary syndrome with improved 
insulin sensitivity through PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.

Qiu Z(1), Dong J(1), Xue C(1), Li X(2), Liu K(1), Liu B(1), Cheng J(3), Huang 
F(4).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of TCM Evaluation and Translational Research, 
Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, PR China.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, State University of New York at 
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 14214, USA.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of TCM Evaluation and Translational Research, 
Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, PR China; Nanjing Zhongshan Pharma Co., Ltd, Nanjing, PR 
China. Electronic address: cj919@sina.com.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of TCM Evaluation and Translational Research, 
Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, PR China. Electronic address: huangfang@cpu.edu.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex 
gynecological endocrine disease commonly occurred in women of childbearing age. 
The main hallmark of PCOS includes elevated androgen production and insulin 
resistance (IR). Liuwei Dihuang Pills (LWDH Pills), a commonly prescribed 
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is widely used as a tonic prescription to 
treat diabetes, female menopause syndrome and other symptoms with'Kidney-Yin' 
deficiency. It has been reported the effects LWDH pills on PI3K/Akt signaling 
pathway in T2DM treatment. Recent studies have also indicated that the treatment 
of menopausal syndrome may be associated with the ovarian sexual hormone levels 
regulated by LWDH pills to alleviate female infertility. However, its potential 
benefits on PCOS have not been fully elucidated.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The primary aim of this study was to investigate the 
alterations of PI3K/Akt pathway in polycystic ovary syndrome-insulin resistance 
(PCOS-IR) progression induced by letrozole combined with high fat diet (HFD) and 
then to explore the detailed mechanism of LWDH Pills to alleviate PCOS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The female Sprague-Dawley rats were continuously treated 
with letrozole (p.o administration at 1 mg kg-1·day-1) and HFD for 21 days to 
establish the PCOS-IR model. Concurrently, metformin (200 mg kg-1·day-1) or LWDH 
Pills was orally administrated (1.2 or 3.6 g kg-1·day-1) to intervene disease 
progression. The ovarian pathology was evaluated by HE (hematoxylin-eosin) 
staining. The serum sexual hormones, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), 
luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, testosterone, progesterone and fasting 
insulin (FINS) were determined by radioimmunoassay. The protein expressions of 
IRS-1, PI3Kp85α, Akt and FoxO1a were analyzed by western blotting, while the 
mRNA levels of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) and Cyp19a1 in 
ovarian tissue were measured by qPCR.
RESULTS: The upregulated phosphorylation of IRS-1 (S307), down-regulated 
phosphorylation of PI3Kp85α, Akt, and FoxO1a were significantly reversed by LWDH 
Pills (3.6 g kg-1·day-1) in PCOS-IR rats with up-regulated mRNA levels of FSHR 
and Cyp19a1 in ovary. Also, the index of insulin resistance was gradually 
adjusted to normal by LWDH Pills. The serum levels of FSH, estradiol, 
progesterone levels were significantly raised while LH, testosterone were 
reduced. The ovarian polycystic changes were alleviated while the atresia 
follicles were reduced.
CONCLUSION: LWDH Pills therapy obviously improved the ovarian polycystic 
pathogenesis and regained the development of follicles via upregulating Cyp19a1, 
alleviated insulin resistance through acting on PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. 
These findings have provided scientific evidence for LWDH Pills to treat PCOS.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.111965
PMID: 31185267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
