1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020 Mar;1463(1):23-36. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14141. Epub 2019
Jun  21.

Metformin promotes mitophagy in mononuclear cells: a potential in vitro model 
for unraveling metformin's mechanism of action.

Bhansali S(1), Bhansali A(2), Dhawan V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.

Increased oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) 
results in abnormalities in cell repair processes, such as mitophagy, which 
compromises mitochondrial function and contributes to insulin resistance and β 
cell failure. Metformin, widely recommended in the management of T2DM, exerts 
its pleiotropic effects via 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK); however, its 
effect on mitophagy remains elusive. Recent evidence demonstrates that 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) express insulin receptors and the 
human organic cation transporter protein, and they are extensively being used as 
a surrogate for examining mitochondrial function in T2DM. Metformin treatment 
increased the formation of acidic vesicles and mitophagosomes, upregulated 
mitophagy markers, and enhanced mitophagic flux, as indicated by increased 
LC3-II expression and reduced p62 protein levels. In addition, pretreatment with 
compound C (an AMPK inhibitor) significantly decreased the expression of 
mitophagy markers in metformin-treated cells, indicating that metformin induces 
mitophagy via the AMPK pathway. In conclusion, metformin-induced mitophagy may 
improve cellular function, including in β cells, by restoring normal 
mitochondrial phenotype, which may prove beneficial in patients with T2DM and 
other mitochondrial-related diseases. Moreover, PBMCs may be used as a novel 
diagnostic biomarker for identifying mitochondrial disorders.

© 2019 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14141
PMID: 31225649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
