1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2021 Jan;129(1):22-28. doi: 10.1055/a-0921-6420.
 Epub 2019 Jun 24.

The Impact of Ethinyl Estradiol on Metformin Action on Prolactin Levels in Women 
with Hyperprolactinemia.

Krysiak R(1), Szkróbka W(1), Okopień B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Metformin reduced prolactin levels only in women with 
hyperprolactinemia.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this case-control study was to compare metformin 
action on lactoctrope function between women receiving oral contraceptive pills 
and women not using hormonal contraception.
METHODS: The study included two groups of matched women with elevated prolactin 
levels and new-onset prediabetes or diabetes. The first group consisted of 20 
women using oral contraceptive pills for at least 12 months before entering the 
study, while the second group included 20 patients not using any hormonal 
contraception. Over the whole study period, all women were treated with 
metformin (1.7-3 g daily). Circulating levels of glucose, insulin, prolactin, 
thyrotropin, free thyroid hormones, adrenocorticotropic hormone, gonadotropins 
and insulin-like growth factor-1 were measured at the beginning and at the end 
of the study (16 weeks later).
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients completed the study. Metformin reduced plasma 
glucose levels and improved insulin sensitivity but the latter effect was 
stronger in women receiving oral contraceptive pills than in women not using any 
contraception. Although metformin treatment decreased plasma prolactin levels in 
both study groups, this effect was stronger in women taking oral contraceptive 
pills. Only in this group of women, metformin increased plasma luteinizing 
hormone levels. The changes in plasma prolactin correlated with their baseline 
insulin sensitivity and the effect of metformin on insulin sensitivity. 
Metformin did not affect plasma levels of thyrotropin, free thyroxine, free 
triiodothyronine, follicle-stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone and 
insulin-like growth factor-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The obtained results suggest that the effect of metformin on 
overactive lactotropes depends on estrogen levels.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0921-6420
PMID: 31234219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
