1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2020 Jan;43(1):57-73. doi: 10.1007/s40618-019-01077-8.
Epub  2019 Jul 16.

The treatment with pasireotide in Cushing's disease: effect of long-term 
treatment on clinical picture and metabolic profile and management of adverse 
events in the experience of a single center.

Simeoli C(1), Ferrigno R(1), De Martino MC(1), Iacuaniello D(1), Papa F(1), 
Angellotti D(1), Pivonello C(1), Patalano R(1), Negri M(1), Colao A(1), 
Pivonello R(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia, 
Università "Federico II" di Napoli, Via Sergio Pansini 5, 80131, Naples, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia, 
Università "Federico II" di Napoli, Via Sergio Pansini 5, 80131, Naples, Italy. 
rosario.pivonello@unina.it.

PURPOSES: Pasireotide is the first medical therapy officially approved for adult 
patients with Cushing's disease (CD) experiencing failure of pituitary surgery 
or not candidates for surgery. The current study aimed at investigating 
pasireotide effects on clinical picture and metabolic profile in patients 
enrolled in the phase III CSOM230B2305 trial at Naples center. In addition, the 
current study focused on safety issues encountered during the study, detailing 
the management of the different adverse events associated with the treatment 
with pasireotide in Naples center.
METHODS: Fourteen patients entered the study; eight patients, receiving 
pasireotide for at least 6 months, were considered for the efficacy analysis, 
whereas the entire cohort of 14 patients was considered for the safety analysis.
RESULTS: Full or partial disease control was obtained in 85.7% of patients, 
according to a "per-protocol" methodology analysis, and in 42.9% of patients, 
according to an "intention-to-treat" methodology analysis, after 12 months of 
treatment. A relevant improvement in clinical signs and symptoms, mainly in 
facial rubor, supraclavicular fat pad, bruising, hirsutism, and muscle strength 
was observed; body weight, body mass index, and waist circumference 
significantly reduced, and a slight non-significant reduction was observed in 
the prevalence of visceral obesity, hypercholesterolemia, and 
hypertriglyceridemia. Deterioration of glucose metabolism represented the most 
common adverse event, occurring in 71.4% of patients, and requiring a dietary 
regimen as first step, metformin therapy and/or long-acting insulin as second 
step, and short-acting insulin, as third step; no patients discontinued 
treatment for hyperglycaemia. Additional adverse events of interest were nausea 
(21.4%), and vomiting (14.3%), spontaneously resolved in few weeks or some 
months, except in one patient unsuccessfully treated with metoclopramide and 
ondansetron, and diarrhoea (14.3%), improved with loperamide treatment. 
Millimetric gallstones and biliary sludge (7.1%) were managed with 
ursodeoxycholic acid, inducing lithiasis and biliary sludge resolution, whereas 
hypocortisolism-related adverse events (7.1%) were resolved with a reduction in 
the pasireotide dose.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study on a limited series of patients contributes to 
confirm that pasireotide may be considered a valid option for treatment of 
patients with CD, although it requires an appropriate management of adverse 
events, especially hyperglycaemia.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-019-01077-8
PMCID: PMC6952330
PMID: 31313243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.S. has been occasional consultant for Shire 
and Ipsen. R.F., M.C.D.M., D.I., F.P., D.A., C.P., Ro.Pa., and M.N. have nothing 
to disclose. A.C. has been Principal Investigator of Research Studies for 
Novartis, Ipsen, and Pfizer; received research grants from Novartis. Ro.Pi. has 
been Principal Investigator of Research Studies for Novartis, HRA Pharma, Ipsen, 
Shire, Corcept Therapeutics, Cortendo AB; received research grants from 
Novartis, Pfizer, Ipsen, HRA Pharma, Shire, IBSA; has been an occasional 
consultant for Novartis, Ipsen, Pfizer, Shire, HRA Pharma, Cortendo AB, Ferring 
and Italfarmaco; and has received fees and honoraria for presentations from 
Novartis, Shire.
