1. J Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Feb;60(2):164-171. doi: 10.1002/jcph.1507. Epub 2019
Aug  6.

The Impact of Testosterone on Metformin Action on Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Thyroid 
Axis Activity in Men: A Pilot Study.

Krysiak R(1), Szkróbka W(1), Okopień B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

The effect of metformin on thyrotrope function seems to be sex dependent. The 
aim of this study was to determine the role of endogenous testosterone in the 
impact of metformin on hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis activity. The study 
population consisted of 2 groups of men with nonautoimmune hypothyroidism 
matched for age, weight, insulin sensitivity, and thyrotropin levels. The first 
group (n = 11) included subjects with low serum testosterone levels, while the 
second (n = 12) men with testosterone levels within the reference range. Because 
of concomitant type 2 diabetes, all men were treated with metformin (2550-3000 
mg daily). Circulating levels of glucose, prolactin, testosterone, 
gonadotropins, thyrotropin, and free thyroid hormones were measured, while 
the structure parameters of thyroid homeostasis and the degree of insulin 
sensitivity were calculated at baseline and 16 weeks later. In both study 
groups, metformin decreased plasma glucose levels and improved insulin 
sensitivity. However, only in men with low testosterone levels, the drug 
decreased thyrotropin levels, reduced Jostel's thyrotropin index, and increased 
SPINA-GT. Metformin-induced changes in thyrotropin and Jostel's index correlated 
with their baseline values, baseline levels of testosterone, and with the effect 
of treatment on insulin sensitivity. In men with neither low or normal 
testosterone levels, metformin affected free thyroid hormones, prolactin, 
testosterone, gonadotropins, and SPINA-GD. The obtained results suggest that the 
impact of metformin on thyrotrope function depends on the androgen status of a 
patient.

© 2019, The American College of Clinical Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/jcph.1507
PMID: 31389032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
