1. J Cell Biochem. 2020 Jan;121(1):816-827. doi: 10.1002/jcb.29327. Epub 2019 Aug
 5.

Effect of metformin on myotube BCAA catabolism.

Rivera ME(1), Lyon ES(1), Vaughan RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Exercise Science, High Point University, High Point, North 
Carolina.

Metformin has antihyperglycemic properties and is a commonly prescribed drug for 
type II diabetes mellitus. Metformin functions in part by activating 
5'-AMP-activated protein kinase, reducing hepatic gluconeogenesis and blood 
glucose. Metformin also upregulates peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-gamma coactivator-1α (PGC-1α). Several population studies have shown 
levels of circulating branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) positively correlate 
with insulin resistance. Because BCAA catabolic enzyme content is regulated by 
PGC-1α, we hypothesized metformin may alter BCAA catabolism. Therefore, the 
purpose of this work was to investigate the effect of metformin at varying 
concentrations on myotube metabolism and related gene and protein expression. 
C2C12 myotubes were treated with metformin at 30 uM (physiological) or 2 mM 
(supraphysiological) for up to 24 hours. Metabolic gene expression was measured 
via quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction, protein expression was 
measured using Western blot, and mitochondrial and glycolytic metabolism were 
measured via oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification rate, 
respectively. Supraphysiological metformin upregulated PGC-1α mRNA expression 
along with related downstream targets, yet the reduced expression of electron 
transport chain components as well as basal and peak cell metabolism. 
Supraphysiological metformin also suppressed branched-chain aminotransferase 2 
(BCAT2) and branched-chain-alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase E1a (BCKDHa) mRNA 
expression as well as BCAT2 protein expression and BCKDHa activity, which was 
accompanied by decreased Kruppel-like factor 15 protein expression. 
Physiological levels of metformin suppressed BCKDHa and cytochrome c oxidase 
mRNA expression at early time points (4-12 hours) but had no effect on any other 
outcomes. Together these data suggest metformin may suppress BCAA catabolic 
enzyme expression or activity, possibly reducing levels of circulating 
gluconeogenic substrates.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.29327
PMID: 31385363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
