1. Neuro Oncol. 2020 Jan 11;22(1):139-151. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noz140.

Targeting reduced mitochondrial DNA quantity as a therapeutic approach in 
pediatric high-grade gliomas.

Shen H(1), Yu M(2)(3), Tsoli M(1), Chang C(1), Joshi S(1), Liu J(1), Ryall 
S(2)(3), Chornenkyy Y(2)(3), Siddaway R(2)(3), Hawkins C(2)(3)(4), Ziegler 
DS(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(2)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(5)Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Despite increased understanding of the genetic events underlying 
pediatric high-grade gliomas (pHGGs), therapeutic progress is static, with poor 
understanding of nongenomic drivers. We therefore investigated the role of 
alterations in mitochondrial function and developed an effective combination 
therapy against pHGGs.
METHODS: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number was measured in a cohort of 60 
pHGGs. The implication of mtDNA alteration in pHGG tumorigenesis was studied and 
followed by an efficacy investigation using patient-derived cultures and 
orthotopic xenografts.
RESULTS: Average mtDNA content was significantly lower in tumors versus normal 
brains. Decreasing mtDNA copy number in normal human astrocytes led to a 
markedly increased tumorigenicity in vivo. Depletion of mtDNA in pHGG cells 
promoted cell migration and invasion and therapeutic resistance. Shifting 
glucose metabolism from glycolysis to mitochondrial oxidation with the adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase activator AICAR 
(5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide) or the pyruvate dehydrogenase 
kinase inhibitor dichloroacetate (DCA) significantly inhibited pHGG viability. 
Using DCA to shift glucose metabolism to mitochondrial oxidation and then 
metformin to simultaneously target mitochondrial function disrupted energy 
homeostasis of tumor cells, increasing DNA damage and apoptosis. The triple 
combination with radiation therapy, DCA and metformin led to a more potent 
therapeutic effect in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest metabolic alterations as an onco-requisite 
factor of pHGG tumorigenesis. Targeting reduced mtDNA quantity represents a 
promising therapeutic strategy for pHGG.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. For commercial re-use, please contact 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noz140
PMCID: PMC6954438
PMID: 31398252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
