1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2020 Feb;126(2):110-115. doi:
10.1111/bcpt.13307.  Epub 2019 Aug 17.

Endogenous testosterone determines metformin action on prolactin levels in 
hyperprolactinaemic men: A pilot study.

Krysiak R(1), Szkróbka W(1), Okopień B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

Metformin was found to reduce elevated prolactin levels in women but not in men. 
The current study was aimed at investigating whether endogenous testosterone 
determines the impact of metformin on lactotroph function in men. This 
prospective case-control study included 28 men with recently diagnosed type 2 
diabetes mellitus and mild or moderate hyperprolactinaemia, 14 of whom had low 
testosterone levels, while in the remaining 14 ones' testosterone levels were 
within the reference range. All participants received metformin (2.55-3 g daily) 
for the following 4 months. Circulating levels of glucose, insulin, prolactin, 
testosterone, oestradiol, gonadotropins, sex hormone-binding globulin 
adrenocorticotropic hormone, insulin-like growth factor-1, thyrotropin and 
free thyroid hormones were measured at the beginning and at the end of the 
study. Although metformin reduced plasma glucose levels and improved insulin 
sensitivity in both groups, this effect was stronger in participants with low 
testosterone levels. Only in patients with abnormally low testosterone levels, 
the drug decreased prolactin levels. This effect, which was accompanied by an 
increase in luteinizing hormone levels, was inversely correlated with baseline 
testosterone and calculated free testosterone levels, and positively with 
treatment-induced improvement in insulin sensitivity. In both treatment groups, 
metformin produced a neutral effect on plasma levels of the remaining hormones. 
The obtained results suggest that endogenous testosterone may attenuate the 
impact of metformin on lactotropic cells.

© 2019 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13307
PMID: 31420971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
