1. Can J Diabetes. 2020 Mar;44(2):146-155.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2019.05.008.
Epub  2019 May 27.

Metformin and Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitor Differentially Modulate the 
Intestinal Microbiota and Plasma Metabolome of Metabolically Dysfunctional Mice.

Ryan PM(1), Patterson E(2), Carafa I(3), Mandal R(4), Wishart DS(5), Dinan 
TG(6), Cryan JF(7), Tuohy KM(3), Stanton C(2), Ross RP(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland; Teagasc 
Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland; APC Microbiome 
Ireland, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland.
(2)Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland; APC 
Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland.
(3)Fondazione Edmund Mach - Istituto Agrario, San Michele All'adige, Italy.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada; Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada; National Institute for Nanotechnology, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(6)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland; 
Department of Psychiatry, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland.
(7)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland; 
Department of Neuroscience, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland.
(8)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, County Cork, Ireland. 
Electronic address: p.ross@ucc.ie.

OBJECTIVES: Recent evidence indicates that gut microbiota is altered 
considerably by a variety of commonly prescribed medications. This study 
assessed the impact of 2 antidiabetic therapeutics on gut microbiota and markers 
of cardiometabolic disease in metabolically dysfunctional mice.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were fed a high-fat diet for 24 weeks while receiving 1 of 
2 antidiabetic therapeutics-metformin or dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) 
inhibitor, PKF-275-055-for the final 12 weeks. Mice were assessed for weight 
gain, glucose and cholesterol metabolism, and adiposity. In addition, cecal 
microbiota was analyzed by 16S compositional sequencing, and plasma metabolome 
was analyzed by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Both therapeutics had similar metabolic effects, attenuating mesenteric 
adiposity and improving cholesterol metabolism and insulin sensitivity. However, 
multivariate analyses of microbiota and metabolomics data revealed clear 
divergence of the therapeutic groups. Although both metformin and PKF-275-055 
mice displayed significantly decreased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratios, only 
metformin harboured metabolic health-associated Akkermansia, Parabacteroides and 
Christensenella. Paradoxically, metformin also reduced α diversity, a metric 
frequently associated with host metabolic fitness. PKF-275-055 mice displayed 
elevated levels of butyrate-producing Ruminococcus and acetogen Dorea, with 
reduced levels of certain plasma sphingomyelin, phosphatidylcholine and 
lysophosphatidylcholine entities. In turn, metformin reduced levels of 
acylcarnitines, a functional group associated with systemic metabolic 
dysfunction. Finally, several associations were identified between metabolites 
and altered taxa.
CONCLUSIONS: This study represents the first direct comparison of the 
microbiota-modifying effects of metformin and a DPP-4 inhibitor, and proposes 
several putative microbial targets both in terms of novel therapeutic 
development and adverse effect prevention.

Copyright © 2019 Canadian Diabetes Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2019.05.008
PMID: 31445961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
