1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Feb;22(2):141-148. doi: 10.1111/dom.13869. Epub 2019
 Oct 7.

Mechanism of glucose-lowering by metformin in type 2 diabetes: Role of bile 
acids.

Sansome DJ(1), Xie C(1), Veedfald S(1)(2), Horowitz M(1), Rayner CK(1), Wu 
T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Medical School and Centre of Research Excellence in Translating 
Nutritional Science to Good Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Institute of Diabetes, School 
of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an increasingly prevalent chronic condition, 
characterized by abnormally elevated blood glucose concentrations and, as a 
consequence, increased risk of micro- and macrovascular complications. Metformin 
is usually the first-line glucose-lowering medication in T2DM; however, despite 
being used for more than 60 years, the mechanism underlying the glucose-lowering 
action of metformin remains incompletely understood. Although metformin reduces 
hepatic glucose production, there is persuasive evidence that the 
gastrointestinal tract is crucial in mediating this effect, particularly via 
secretion of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). It is now 
well recognized that bile acids, in addition to their established function in 
fat digestion and absorption, are important regulators of glucose metabolism. 
Exposure of the small and large intestine to bile acids induces GLP-1 secretion, 
modulates the composition of the gut microbiota, and reduces postprandial blood 
glucose excursions in humans with and without T2DM. Metformin reduces intestinal 
bile acid resorption substantially, such that intraluminal bile acids may, at 
least in part, account for its glucose-lowering effect. The present review 
focuses on the conceptual shift in our understanding as to how metformin lowers 
blood glucose in T2DM, with a particular emphasis on the role of intestinal bile 
acids.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13869
PMID: 31468642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
