1. Folia Morphol (Warsz). 2020;79(3):476-488. doi: 10.5603/FM.a2019.0100. Epub
2019  Sep 6.

Effect of high-fat diet-induced obesity on thyroid gland structure in female 
rats and the possible ameliorating effect of metformin therapy.

El-Sayed SM(1), Ibrahim HM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams 
University, Cairo, Egypt. drsayedanatomy@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams 
University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is known to induce a state of lipotoxicity that affects the 
different organs of the body. Metformin is an antidiabetic drug commonly used in 
obesity treatment. It was known to improve thyroid function and its regulating 
hormones. Structural changes in the thyroid gland associated with obesity have 
not been well investigated. So, the aim of the present study is to detect 
structural changes in thyroid gland induced by obesity and to investigate the 
possible protective role of metformin therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty adult female albino rats were divided into three 
groups (10 rats each). Group I (control group), group II (rats fed with a 
high-fat diet), and group III (rats fed with a high-fat diet and treated with 
metformin therapy). After 12 weeks, rats from all groups were sacrificed. Blood 
samples were taken for measurement of lipid profile, thyroid stimulating hormone 
(TSH), free T3 and free T4. Thyroid glands were extracted and processed for 
histological and ultrastructural study. Morphometric measurements for the 
colloid area of thyroid follicles and height of the follicular cells were done.
RESULTS: Group I displayed normal biochemical parameters and architecture of the 
thyroid gland. Group II revealed disordered lipid profile, high TSH, free T3 and 
T4. Microscopically, large thyroid follicles with excessive colloid accumulation 
and decreased follicular cells height were seen. Some follicular cells showed 
pyknotic nuclei, vacuolated cytoplasm and disrupted basement membrane with mast 
cell infiltration of the thyroid tissue. Ultrastructurally, group II follicular 
cells showed loss of apical microvilli, dense shrunken nuclei, dilated 
endoplasmic reticulum, swollen damaged mitochondria with large intracellular 
vacuoles and colloid droplets. In group III, the biochemical parameters and 
structure of thyroid follicles were improved, and they had a near-normal 
appearance.
CONCLUSIONS: Obesity induced by high-fat diet in female rats structurally and 
functionally changed the thyroid gland in a way that may explain hypothyroidism 
associated with obesity. These changes were improved by metformin therapy.

DOI: 10.5603/FM.a2019.0100
PMID: 31489607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
