1. Biotechnol Prog. 2020 Jan;36(1):e2904. doi: 10.1002/btpr.2904. Epub 2019 Oct
3.

Design and in silico modeling of Indoloquinoxaline incorporated keratin 
nanoparticles for modulation of glucose metabolism in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Kunjiappan S(1), Theivendren P(2), Pavadai P(3), Govindaraj S(4), 
Sankaranarayanan M(5), Somasundaram B(6), Arunachalam S(1), Ram Kumar Pandian 
S(1), Ammunje DN(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kalasalingam Academy of Research and Education, 
Krishnankoil, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Saraswathi College of Pharmacy, 
Hapur, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, M S Ramaiah 
University of Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, MNR College of Pharmacy, Sangareddy, 
Telangana, India.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, 
India.
(6)Sir CV Raman-KS Krishnan International Research Center, Kalasalingam Academy 
of Research and Education, Krishnankoil, Tamil Nadu, India.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, M S Ramaiah University of 
Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

The following study was done to assess the glucose utilizing efficiency of 
Indoloquinoxaline derivative incorporated keratin nanoparticles (NPs) in 3T3-L1 
adipocytes. Indoloquinoxaline derivative had wide range of biological activities 
including antidiabetic activity. In this view, Indoloquinoxaline moiety 
containing N, N-dimethyl (3-fluoro-6H-indolo [3,2-b] quinoxalin-6-yl) 
methanamine compound was designed and synthesized, and further it is 
incorporated into keratin nanoparticles. The formulated NPs, drug entrapment 
efficiency, releasing capacity, stability, and physicochemical properties were 
characterized by various spectral analyzer and obtained results of 
characterizations were confirmed the properties of NPs. The analysis of 
mechanism underlying the glucose utilization of NPs was examined through 
molecular docking with identified target, and observed in silico study reports 
shown strong interaction of NPs in the binding pockets of AMPK and PTP1B. Based 
on the in silico screening, the formulated NPs was performed for in vitro 
cellular viability and glucose uptake studies on 3T3-L1 adipocytes. 
Interestingly, 40 μg of NPs displayed 78.2 ± 2.76% cellular viability, and no 
cell death was observed at lower concentrations. Further, the concentration 
dependent glucose utilization was observed at different concentrations of NPs in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes. The results of NPs (40 μg) on glucose utilization have 
revealed eminent result 58.56 ± 4.54% compared to that of Metformin (10 μM) and 
Insulin (10 μM). The identified results clearly indicated that Indoloquinoxaline 
derivative incorporated keratin NPs significantly increased glucose utilization 
efficiency and protect the cells against the insulin resistance.

© 2019 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.2904
PMID: 31496124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
