1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Feb;22(2):173-181. doi: 10.1111/dom.13882. Epub 2019
 Oct 17.

Comparison of the effects of gemigliptin and dapagliflozin on glycaemic 
variability in type 2 diabetes: A randomized, open-label, active-controlled, 
12-week study (STABLE II study).

Kwak SH(1), Hwang YC(2), Won JC(3), Bae JC(4), Kim HJ(5), Suh S(6), Lee EY(7), 
Lee S(8), Kim SY(9), Kim JH(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Sanggye Paik Hospital, Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center, Inje 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Samsung 
Changwon Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Changwon, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, 
Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Dong-A University Medical Center, Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Clinical Development Team, LG Chem, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Chosun University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(10)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Samsung 
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to compare the effect of gemigliptin, a 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, and dapagliflozin, a sodium glucose 
co-transporter-2 inhibitor, on glycaemic variability in type 2 diabetes 
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this randomized, blinded end point, multicentre 
clinical trial, we enrolled 71 patients with type 2 diabetes who were 
inadequately controlled with metformin alone or were drug naïve. The 
participants were randomized to receive gemigliptin 50 mg (n = 35) or 
dapagliflozin 10 mg (n = 36) daily for 12 weeks. Glycaemic variability was 
estimated by mean amplitude of glycaemic excursions (MAGE), standard deviation 
(SD) and coefficient of variation (CV) using a 6-day continuous glucose 
monitoring system. The primary efficacy endpoint was change in MAGE after 
12 weeks compared to baseline.
RESULTS: Intergroup differences in baseline characteristics were not 
significant. The adjusted mean change (± standard error) in MAGE after 12 weeks 
in the gemigliptin and dapagliflozin groups was -27.2 ± 4.4 mg/dL and -7.9 ± 4.9 
mg/dL, respectively. Between-group comparisons showed a significantly larger 
reduction in MAGE in the gemigliptin group (-19.2 mg/dL; 95% CI, -31.3 to -7.2; 
P = .002). Measures of SD and CV also showed a significantly larger reduction in 
the gemigliptin group. Average glycaemic control, estimated by HbA1c, fasting 
glucose and safety profiles, was comparable between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to dapagliflozin, gemigliptin significantly improved 
glycaemic variability, with similar glucose-lowering efficacy and safety 
profiles in patients with type 2 diabetes who were inadequately controlled with 
metformin alone or were drug naïve.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13882
PMID: 31502749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
