1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Feb;22(2):158-166. doi: 10.1111/dom.13884. Epub 2019
 Oct 24.

Efficacy of metformin in preventing progression to diabetes in a Chinese 
population with impaired glucose regulation: Protocol for a multicentre, 
open-label, randomized controlled clinical study.

Ji L(1), Sun N(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhang L(3), Shen S(4), Wang X(5), Li Q(6), Dong 
L(7), Ren W(8), Qi L(9), Li Y(10), Yan S(11), Cheng W(12), Kuang H(13), Li 
G(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Baoding First Central Hospital, 
Baoding, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Second Hospital of Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Yanji Hospital, Yanji, Yanbian 
Korean Autonomous Prefecture, Jilin, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Jinzhou Central Hospital, 
Jinzhou, Liaoning, China.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kailuan General Hospital, 
Tangshan, Hebei Province, China.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhangjiakou First Hospital, 
Zhangjiakou, Hebei, China.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei, China.
(9)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Beijing Yanhua Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(10)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Beijing Pinggu Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(11)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(12)Department of Hypertension, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Beijing, China.
(13)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(14)Department of Endocrinology, Fuwai Hospital & Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, China.

AIM: To investigate the effectiveness of metformin in delaying or preventing 
progression to diabetes in a Chinese population with impaired glucose regulation 
(IGR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This multicentre, randomized, open-label, controlled 
study (NCT03441750) will assess the efficacy of metformin in preventing diabetes 
over ≥2 years. Eligible participants will be randomly assigned (1:1) to 
lifestyle intervention (LSI) or metformin plus LSI, with stratification based on 
blood pressure, anti-hypertensive medication use and isolated/non-isolated 
impaired fasting glucose. All participants will receive LSI advice. Participants 
in the metformin plus LSI group will receive metformin 850 mg once daily for the 
first 2 weeks, and twice daily thereafter, according to tolerability.
RESULTS: The primary objective is to compare rates of newly diagnosed diabetes 
in the two intervention groups. Changes in glycaemia, blood pressure, body 
weight, insulin resistance, and safety outcomes will also be evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: This large clinical trial in a Chinese population with IGR aims to 
provide critical information to guide clinical decision-making in order to 
alleviate the current diabetes epidemic.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13884
PMID: 31512365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
