1. Pituitary. 2020 Feb;23(1):27-37. doi: 10.1007/s11102-019-00987-3.

Dopamine agonist resistant prolactinomas: any alternative medical treatment?

Souteiro P(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Karavitaki N(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário de São João, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine of University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(4)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research (IMSR), College of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, IBR Tower, Level 2, Birmingham, B15 
2TT, UK.
(5)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health 
Partners, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, University Hospitals 
Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(7)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research (IMSR), College of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, IBR Tower, Level 2, Birmingham, B15 
2TT, UK. n.karavitaki@bham.ac.uk.
(8)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health 
Partners, Birmingham, UK. n.karavitaki@bham.ac.uk.
(9)Department of Endocrinology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, University Hospitals 
Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. n.karavitaki@bham.ac.uk.

Consensus guidelines recommend dopamine agonists (DAs) as the mainstay treatment 
for prolactinomas. In most patients, DAs achieve tumor shrinkage and 
normoprolactinemia at well tolerated doses. However, primary or, less often, 
secondary resistance to DAs may be also encountered representing challenging 
clinical scenarios. This is particularly true for aggressive prolactinomas in 
which surgery and radiotherapy may not achieve tumor control. In these cases, 
alternative medical treatments have been considered but data on their efficacy 
should be interpreted within the constraints of publication bias and of lack of 
relevant clinical trials. The limited reports on somatostatin analogues have 
shown conflicting results, but cases with optimal outcomes have been documented. 
Data on estrogen modulators and metformin are scarce and their usefulness 
remains to be evaluated. In many aggressive lactotroph tumors, temozolomide has 
demonstrated optimal outcomes, whereas for other cytotoxic agents, tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors and for inhibitors of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), 
higher quality evidence is needed. Finally, promising preliminary results from 
in vitro and animal reports need to be further assessed and, if appropriate, 
translated in human studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11102-019-00987-3
PMCID: PMC6957547
PMID: 31522358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N. Karavitaki has received educational and 
research Grants from Novartis, Pfizer and Ipsen.
