1. Am J Ther. 2020 Jan/Feb;27(1):e79-e90. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000001088.

Insulin Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes.

Aschner P(1).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Javeriana University, San Ignacio University Hospital, 
Colombian Diabetes Association, Bogotá, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Since the discovery of insulin, it was the only drug available for 
the treatment of diabetes until the development of sulfonylureas and biguanides 
50 years later. But even with the availability of oral glucose-lowering drugs, 
insulin supplementation was often needed to achieve good glucose control in type 
2 diabetes. Insulin NPH became the basal insulin therapy of choice and adding 
NPH to metformin and/or sulfonylureas became the standard of care until basal 
insulin analogs were developed and new glucose-lowering drugs became available.
AREAS OF UNCERTAINTY: The advantages in cost-benefit of insulin analogs and 
their combination with new glucose-lowering drugs are still a matter of debate. 
There is no general agreement on how to avoid inertia by prescribing insulin 
therapy in type 2 diabetes when really needed, as reflected by the diversity of 
recommendations in the current clinical practice guidelines.
DATA SOURCES: When necessary for this review, a systematic search of the 
evidence was done in PubMed and Cochrane databases.
THERAPEUTIC ADVANCES: Adding new oral glucose-lowering drugs to insulin such as 
DPP-4 inhibitors lead to a modest HbA1c reduction without weight gain and no 
increase in hypoglycemia. When SGLT-2 inhibitors are added instead, there is a 
slightly higher HbA1c reduction, but with body weight and blood pressure 
reduction. The downside is the increase in genital tract infections. GLP-1 
receptor agonists have become the best alternative when basal insulin fails, 
particularly using fixed ratio combinations. Rapid-acting insulins via the 
inhaled route may also become an alternative for insulin supplementation and/or 
intensification. "Smart insulins" are under investigation and may become 
available for clinical use in the near future.
CONCLUSIONS: Aggressive weight loss strategies together with the new 
glucose-lowering drugs which do not cause hypoglycemia nor weight gain should 
limit the number of patients with type 2 diabetes needing insulin. Nevertheless, 
because of therapeutic inertia and the progressive nature of the disease, many 
need at least a basal insulin supplementation and insulin analogs are the best 
choice as they become more affordable. Fixed ratio combinations with GLP1 
receptor agonists are a good choice for intensification of insulin therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000001088
PMID: 31567175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
