1. Clin Breast Cancer. 2020 Feb;20(1):80-86. doi: 10.1016/j.clbc.2019.08.004.
Epub  2019 Aug 29.

Phase 1 Study of Erlotinib and Metformin in Metastatic Triple-Negative Breast 
Cancer.

Fenn K(1), Maurer M(2), Lee SM(3), Crew KD(1), Trivedi MS(1), Accordino MK(1), 
Hershman DL(1), Kalinsky K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York 
NY.
(2)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY.
(4)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York 
NY. Electronic address: kk2693@columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently overexpressed 
in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (mTNBC). One strategy for overcoming 
resistance to EGFR inhibition is concomitant inhibition of downstream signaling. 
The antidiabetic drug metformin inhibits both MAPK and PI3K/mTOR pathway 
signaling. We evaluated the combination of erlotinib and metformin in a phase 1 
study of patients with mTNBC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with mTNBC who had received at least one prior 
line of therapy for metastatic disease were eligible. Erlotinib dose was fixed 
at 150 mg daily. Metformin dose escalation was planned according to a 3 + 3 
design. Dose-limiting toxicities (DLT) were assessed during the first 5 weeks of 
therapy. The primary objective was to determine the maximum tolerated dose of 
metformin with fixed-dose erlotinib. Secondary endpoints were response rate, 
stable disease rate, and progression-free survival.
RESULTS: Eight patients were enrolled. The median number of prior therapies for 
metastatic disease was 2.5 (range, 1-6). No DLT events were reported during the 
DLT assessment period. Most adverse events were grade 1/2. Grade 3 diarrhea 
despite maximum supportive care required dose reduction of metformin in one 
patient. Grade 3 rash led to study withdrawal in one patient. No grade 4 adverse 
events were reported. The best observed response was stable disease in 2 
patients (25%). Median progression-free survival was 60 days (range, 36-61 
days).
CONCLUSION: Erlotinib and metformin were well tolerated in a population of 
pretreated mTNBC patients but did not demonstrate efficacy in this population.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clbc.2019.08.004
PMCID: PMC7304226
PMID: 31570268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
KF declares that she has no conflict of interest. MM is employed by 
Bristol-Myers Squibb. SL declares that she has no conflict of interest. KDC 
declares that she has no conflict of interest. MST declares that she has no 
conflict of interest. MKA declares that she has no conflict of interest. DLH 
declares that she has no conflict of interest. KK is an advisor for 
Biotheranostics, Eli-Lilly, Pfizer, Amgen, Novartis, Eisai, AstraZeneca, Odonate 
Therapeutics, Ipsen, and Genentech, has research funding from Incyte, Genentech, 
Eli-Lilly, Pfizer, Calithera Biosciences, Acetylon, Seattle Genetics, Amgen, 
Zeno Pharmaceuticals, and CytomX Therapeutics, and his spouse is employed by 
Array Biopharma.
