1. J Nephrol. 2020 Feb;33(1):9-35. doi: 10.1007/s40620-019-00650-x.

Diabetic kidney disease: new clinical and therapeutic issues. Joint position 
statement of the Italian Diabetes Society and the Italian Society of Nephrology 
on "The natural history of diabetic kidney disease and treatment of 
hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes and impaired renal function".

Pugliese G(1)(2), Penno G(3)(4), Natali A(3)(5), Barutta F(6), Di Paolo S(7), 
Reboldi G(8), Gesualdo L(9)(10), De Nicola L(11); Italian Diabetes Society and 
the Italian Society of Nephrology.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, 
Rome, Italy. giuseppe.pugliese@uniroma1.it.
(2)Endocrine and Metabolic Unit, Sant'Andrea University Hospital, Rome, Italy. 
giuseppe.pugliese@uniroma1.it.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(4)Diabetes Unit, University Hospital, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Unit of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(7)Nephrology Unit, "Mons. Dimiccoli" Hospital, Barletta, Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(9)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, "Aldo Moro" University, 
Bari, Italy.
(10)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, "Policlinico" University 
Hospital, Bari, Italy.
(11)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical 
Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

AIMS: This joint document of the Italian Diabetes Society and the Italian 
Society of Nephrology reviews the natural history of diabetic kidney disease 
(DKD) in the light of the recent epidemiological literature and provides updated 
recommendations on anti-hyperglycemic treatment with non-insulin agents.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Recent epidemiological studies have disclosed a wide 
heterogeneity of DKD. In addition to the classical albuminuric phenotype, two 
new albuminuria-independent phenotypes have emerged, i.e., "nonalbuminuric renal 
impairment" and "progressive renal decline", suggesting that DKD progression 
toward end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) may occur through two distinct pathways, 
albuminuric and nonalbuminuric. Several biomarkers have been associated with 
decline of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) independent of 
albuminuria and other clinical variables, thus possibly improving ESKD 
prediction. However, the pathogenesis and anatomical correlates of these 
phenotypes are still unclear. Also the management of hyperglycemia in patients 
with type 2 diabetes and impaired renal function has profoundly changed during 
the last two decades. New anti-hyperglycemic drugs, which do not cause 
hypoglycemia and weight gain and, in some cases, seem to provide cardiorenal 
protection, have become available for treatment of these individuals. In 
addition, the lowest eGFR safety thresholds for some of the old agents, 
particularly metformin and insulin secretagogues, have been reconsidered.
CONCLUSIONS: The heterogeneity in the clinical presentation and course of DKD 
has important implications for the diagnosis, prognosis, and possibly treatment 
of this complication. The therapeutic options for patients with type 2 diabetes 
and impaired renal function have substantially increased, thus allowing a better 
management of these individuals.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-019-00650-x
PMCID: PMC7007429
PMID: 31576500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GPu reported lecture and/or consultant fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, MundiPharma, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Sigma-Tau, Takeda, and travel grants from AstraZeneca, 
Laboratori Guidotti, Sanofi, and Takeda. GPe reported lecture fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novo Nordisk, 
Sigma-Tau and Takeda and travel grants from AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk and 
Takeda. AN reported consultant and/or lecture fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Eli Lilly. LDN reported lecture and/or consultant fees from Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, MundiPharma, Janssen, Vifor Fresenius. No other 
disclosures were reported.
