1. Eye (Lond). 2020 Jan;34(1):12-28. doi: 10.1038/s41433-019-0603-z. Epub 2019
Oct  8.

A review of systemic medications that may modulate the risk of glaucoma.

Wu A(1), Khawaja AP(2), Pasquale LR(3), Stein JD(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust 
and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. jdstein@med.umich.edu.
(5)Center for Eye Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA. jdstein@med.umich.edu.
(6)Department of Health Management and Policy, University of Michigan School of 
Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. jdstein@med.umich.edu.

With increasing longevity, patients are developing more and more chronic 
diseases that require treatment with medications. Yet, it is not fully 
understood the extent by which these systemic medications affect ocular 
structures and whether they may increase or decrease the risk of 
sight-threatening ocular diseases. This review provides a summary of reported 
associations between different systemic medications and the risk of developing 
glaucoma or experiencing disease progression. Medication classes covered in this 
review that are known to or may modulate the risk of open-angle glaucoma include 
corticosteroids, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, metformin, statins, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, bupropion, postmenopausal hormones, and 
cannabinoids. Medication classes addressed in this review that may increase the 
risk of angle closure glaucoma include anticholinergics, adrenergic agonists, 
certain classes of antidepressants, sulfonamides, and topiramate.

Publisher: 可能增加青光眼发病风险的全身药物: 随着寿命延长, 患者正在面临越来越多的需要药物治疗的慢性疾病。然而, 
目前还不完全了解这些全身性药物对眼结构的影响程度, 
以及它们是否可能增加或降低威胁视力的眼部疾病的风险。该综述提供了所报道的不同系统性药物之间的关联性以及发生青光眼或疾病进展的风险的总结。本综述中囊括了可能会增加开角型青光眼风险的药物包括皮质类固醇, 
β受体阻滞剂, 钙通道阻滞剂, 二甲双胍, 他汀类药物, 选择性5-羟色胺再摄取抑制剂, 苯丙胺, 
绝经后激素和大麻素。本综述中提到的可能增加闭角型青光眼风险的药物包括抗胆碱能类药物, 肾上腺素能激动剂, 某些类型的抗抑郁药, 磺胺类药物和托吡酯。.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-019-0603-z
PMCID: PMC7002596
PMID: 31595027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Pasquale is a consultant for Bausch+Lomb, 
Eyenovia, Nicox, and Verily.
