1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Mar 6;432(5):1514-1534. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.09.016. Epub 
2019 Oct 16.

Recent Insights Into Mechanisms of β-Cell Lipo- and Glucolipotoxicity in Type 2 
Diabetes.

Lytrivi M(1), Castell AL(2), Poitout V(3), Cnop M(4).

Author information:
(1)ULB Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus Hospital, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)CRCHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada; Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)CRCHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada; Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: Vincent.poitout@umontreal.ca.
(4)ULB Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus Hospital, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
mcnop@ulb.ac.be.

The deleterious effects of chronically elevated free fatty acid (FFA) levels on 
glucose homeostasis are referred to as lipotoxicity, and the concurrent exposure 
to high glucose may cause synergistic glucolipotoxicity. Lipo- and 
glucolipotoxicity have been studied for over 25 years. Here, we review the 
current evidence supporting the role of pancreatic β-cell lipo- and 
glucolipotoxicity in type 2 diabetes (T2D), including lipid-based interventions 
in humans, prospective epidemiological studies, and human genetic findings. In 
addition to total FFA quantity, the quality of FFAs (saturation and chain 
length) is a key determinant of lipotoxicity. We discuss in vitro and in vivo 
experimental models to investigate lipo- and glucolipotoxicity in β-cells and 
describe experimental pitfalls. Lipo- and glucolipotoxicity adversely affect 
many steps of the insulin production and secretion process. The molecular 
mechanisms underpinning lipo- and glucolipotoxic β-cell dysfunction and death 
comprise endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress and mitochondrial 
dysfunction, impaired autophagy, and inflammation. Crosstalk between these 
stress pathways exists at multiple levels and may aggravate β-cell lipo- and 
glucolipotoxicity. Lipo- and glucolipotoxicity are therapeutic targets as 
several drugs impact the underlying stress responses in β-cells, potentially 
contributing to their glucose-lowering effects in T2D.

Crown Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.09.016
PMCID: PMC7073302
PMID: 31628942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
