1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Jan 1;105(1):dgz025. doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgz025.

Gluco-Metabolic Effects of Pharmacotherapy-Induced Modulation of Bile Acid 
Physiology.

Brønden A(1), Knop FK(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical M etabolic Research, Gentofte Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, DK-2900 Hellerup, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(3)Novo Nordisk Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(4)Steno Diabetes Copenhagen, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark.

CONTEXT: The discovery and characterization of the bile acid specific receptors 
farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) have 
facilitated a wealth of research focusing on the link between bile acid 
physiology and glucose metabolism. Modulation of FXR and TGR5 activation have 
been demonstrated to affect the secretion of glucagon-like peptide 1, insulin, 
and glucagon as well as energy expenditure and gut microbiota composition, with 
potential beneficial effects on glucose metabolism.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A search strategy based on literature searches in on 
PubMed with various combinations of the key words FXR, TGR5, agonist, apical 
sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT), bile acid sequestrant, metformin, 
and glucose metabolism has been applied to obtain material for the present 
review. Furthermore, manual searches including scanning of reference lists in 
relevant papers and conference proceedings have been performed.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: This review provides an outline of the link between bile 
acid and glucose metabolism, with a special focus on the gluco-metabolic impact 
of treatment modalities with modulating effects on bile acid physiology; 
including FXR agonists, TGR5 agonists, ASBT inhibitors, bile acid sequestrants, 
and metformin.
CONCLUSIONS: Any potential beneficial gluco-metabolic effects of FXR agonists 
remain to be established, whereas the clinical relevance of TGR5-based treatment 
modalities seems limited because of substantial safety concerns of TGR5 agonists 
observed in animal models. The glucose-lowering effects of ASBT inhibitors, bile 
acid sequestrants, and metformin are at least partly mediated by modulation of 
bile acid circulation, which might allow an optimization of these bile 
acid-modulating treatment modalities. (J Clin Endocrinol Metab XX: 00-00, 2019).

© Endocrine Society 2019. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgz025
PMID: 31630179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
