1. Med Hypotheses. 2020 Jan;134:109420. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109420. Epub
2019  Oct 3.

Inhibition of midkine by metformin can contribute to its anticancer effects in 
malignancies: A proposal mechanism of action of metformin in context of 
endometrial cancer prevention and therapy.

Karadeniz Z(1), Aynacıoğlu AŞ(2), Bilir A(3), Tuna MY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Istanbul Aydin University, Medical 
Faculty, Florya Main Campus, Kücükcekmece, 34295 Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Pharmacology, Istanbul Aydin University, Medical 
Faculty, Florya Main Campus, Kücükcekmece, 34295 Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic 
address: ahmetaynacioglu@aydin.edu.tr.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Istanbul Aydin University, Medical 
Faculty, Florya Main Campus, Kücükcekmece, 34295 Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Istanbul Aydin University, Medical Faculty, Florya 
Main Campus, Kücükcekmece, 34295 Istanbul, Turkey.

Metformin, a drug widely used in the treatment of type II diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM), has been the focus of interest as a potential therapeutic agent for 
certain types of malignancies, including gynaecological cancers [i.e. 
endometrial cancer (EC)]. Although the exact mechanism behind the potential 
anticancer activity of metformin is still not completely understood, certain 
studies have suggested that different effects on cell functions, such as 
inhibition of cell migration, apoptosis and tumor cell proliferation, are 
involved in its preventive and therapeutic effects in certain types of 
malignancies, including EC. In contrast, midkine (MK), a heparin-binding growth 
factor and cytokine, which induces carcinogenesis and chemoresistance, promotes 
the development and progression of many malignant tumours by increasing diverse 
cell functions such as cell proliferation, cell survival and antiapoptotic 
activities via mainly the activation of phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase (PI3K) 
and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. The same pathways are also 
subject to certain therapeutic effects of metformin, although this cytokine and 
this drug have some different mechanism of action pathways as well. Taken 
together, MK and metformin appear to have opposite effects in various biological 
processes such as apoptosis, cell proliferation, cell survival, cell migration, 
and angiogenesis. On the other hand, MK activates PI3K and MAPK cell signal 
pathways, whereas metformin inhibits these two pathways. It seems likely that 
almost all the pathways and cell functions, which play important roles in 
malignancies, are inhibited by metformin and activated by MK. Given the opposite 
relationship between the actions of metformin and MK, we hypothesize that 
metformin may act like a novel MK inhibitor in some malignancies. We also 
discuss the possible relationship between metformin and MK in the context of EC, 
the most common gynecological cancer worldwide, which incidence is rising 
rapidly, in parallel with the increase in obesity, T2DM and insulin resistance. 
In this respect, the therapeutic use of metformin may improve the survival of EC 
or other cancers, via inhibiting or overcoming the unwanted effects of MK in 
carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109420
PMID: 31634770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
