1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2020 Feb 10;30(2):274-281. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2019.09.005. Epub 2019 Sep 18.

Chronic metformin reduces systemic and local inflammatory proteins and improves 
hypertension-related cardiac autonomic dysfunction.

Oliveira PWC(1), de Sousa GJ(1), Birocale AM(1), Gouvêa SA(1), de Figueiredo 
SG(1), de Abreu GR(1), Bissoli NS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, 
Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiological Sciences, Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, 
Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brazil. Electronic address: nazarebissoli@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Metformin has been known to promote cardiovascular benefits 
in humans and animal models, even in non-diabetic subjects. However, its chronic 
effects on hypertension-related autonomic dysfunction remain poorly understood. 
Therefore, we evaluate the cardiac autonomic effects of chronic metformin in 
hypertensive rats.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twelve-week-old male SHR and Wistar rats were separated 
into 3 groups: WN (Wistar normotensive); SC (SHR hypertensive control); and SM 
(SHR: Metformin 300 mg/kg/day for 30 days). Spontaneous and induced (by 
phenylephrine and sodium nitroprusside) baroreflexes were analysed in 
catheterised rats. Next, cardiac autonomic tone was evaluated through heart rate 
shift by atropine (parasympathetic) or atenolol (sympathetic). Plasma TNFα was 
assessed by ELISA. Western blot analyses of inflammatory, oxidant and 
antioxidant proteins were performed. Cardiac parasympathetic tone and baroreflex 
function were lower in SC than in WN, whereas cardiac sympathetic tone was 
higher. Metformin treatment in non-diabetic hypertensive rats reduced the 
resting heart rate, attenuated the cardiac sympathetic tone and improved 
baroreflex (especially in the offsetting of rising BP), while blood pressure and 
glycaemia remained unchanged. Cardiac sympathetic tone correlated negatively 
with spontaneous baroreflex. Metformin reduced plasma TNFα levels and decreased 
tissue expression of COX2 and NOX2 (which were positively correlated), without 
affecting SOD1 and SOD2.
CONCLUSION: Chronic metformin presented anti-inflammatory and antioxidant 
effects and, independently of alterations in glycaemia, it improved cardiac 
autonomic parameters that are impaired in hypertension, being related to 
end-organ damage and mortality. These findings open up perspectives for future 
innovative uses of metformin in cardiovascular diseases, especially in 
hypertension.

Copyright © 2019 The Italian Society of Diabetology, the Italian Society for the 
Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition, and the 
Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2019.09.005
PMID: 31653514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
