1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2020 Jan;92(1):38-45. doi: 10.1111/cen.14122. Epub 2019
 Nov 18.

Effect of clomiphene citrate treatment on the Sertoli cells of dysmetabolic 
obese men with low testosterone levels.

Pelusi C(1), Fanelli F(1), Baccini M(1), Triggiani V(2), Bartolomeo N(3), 
Carbone MD(4), De Pergola G(5), Di Dalmazi G(1), Pagotto U(1), Pasquali R(1), 
Giagulli VA(6).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit and Center for Applied Biomedical Research, Department of 
Medical & Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 
S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine, Internal Medicine, Geriatrics, 
Endocrinology and Rare Diseases, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology, University of Bari, 
Bari, Italy.
(4)Institute of Clinical and Hormonal Research, Foggia, Italy.
(5)Nutrition Outpatient Clinic, Clinical Oncology Unit, University of Bari, 
Bari, Italy.
(6)Outpatients Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disease, Conversano 
Hospital, Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Clomiphene citrate (CC) has been shown to restore the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis by increasing testosterone (T) levels 
to physiological levels in patients with dysmetabolic conditions such as 
obesity, metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the 
data are unclear regarding the effects on Sertoli cell (SC) function.
AIM: To study SC function by assessing Inhibin B (IB) and anti-Mullerian hormone 
(AMH) levels at baseline and after 3 months of CC treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is an ancillary study of a cross-over, randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial performed to evaluate androgen response 
to CC treatment in dysmetabolic obese subjects with low T levels treated with 
metformin. We evaluated SC function by assessing IB and AMH levels at baseline 
and after 3 months of each treatment in ten dysmetabolic obese subjects with low 
T levels. In all subjects, the influence of the clinical characteristics, 
metabolic and hormonal baseline parameters on SC and Leydig (LC) function, 
evaluated respectively with AMH, IB, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and T 
levels, was tested.
RESULTS: No significant changes were observed for IB and AMH concentrations 
after each treatment period. Whereas T and oestradiol (E2) levels were shown to 
be significantly higher in the CC plus metformin phase (CC/Met) only. No 
clinical, metabolic or hormonal parameters showed significant effects on serum 
AMH at baseline or after treatments. However, baseline T, dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) and E2 positively affected IB levels during CC/Met therapy (P = .003, 
P = .038 and P = .049, respectively). Baseline leptin and FSH had a negative 
(P = 031) and positive (P = .048) respectively role on T levels during CC/Met, 
as they were statistically significant compared to the placebo period 
(Plac/Met).
CONCLUSION: Unlike the LC activity, CC was unable to influence SC function, as 
shown by the lack of IB and AMH serum modifications, thus suggesting an 
intrinsic nonreversible defect of SC cells in patients with dysmetabolic 
conditions.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cen.14122
PMID: 31677181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
