1. Cancer Res. 2020 Jan 1;80(1):30-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1389. Epub 
2019 Nov 6.

MET Inhibition Elicits PGC1α-Dependent Metabolic Reprogramming in Glioblastoma.

Zhang Y(#)(1), Nguyen TTT(#)(1), Shang E(2), Mela A(1), Humala N(3), Mahajan 
A(3), Zhao J(4), Shu C(1), Torrini C(1), Sanchez-Quintero MJ(5), Kleiner G(5), 
Bianchetti E(1), Westhoff MA(6), Quinzii CM(5), Karpel-Massler G(7), Bruce 
JN(3), Canoll P(1), Siegelin MD(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, New York.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Bronx Community College, City University 
of New York, Bronx, New York.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, New York.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, New 
York.
(5)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(8)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, New York. ms4169@cumc.columbia.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The receptor kinase c-MET has emerged as a target for glioblastoma therapy. 
However, treatment resistance emerges inevitably. Here, we performed global 
metabolite screening with metabolite set enrichment coupled with transcriptome 
and gene set enrichment analysis and proteomic screening, and identified 
substantial reprogramming of tumor metabolism involving oxidative 
phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation (FAO) with substantial accumulation of 
acyl-carnitines accompanied by an increase of PGC1α in response to genetic 
(shRNA and CRISPR/Cas9) and pharmacologic (crizotinib) inhibition of c-MET. 
Extracellular flux and carbon tracing analyses (U-13C-glucose, U-13C-glutamine, 
and U-13C-palmitic acid) demonstrated enhanced oxidative metabolism, which was 
driven by FAO and supported by increased anaplerosis of glucose carbons. These 
findings were observed in concert with increased number and fusion of 
mitochondria and production of reactive oxygen species. Genetic interference 
with PGC1α rescued this oxidative phenotype driven by c-MET inhibition. 
Silencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that cAMP 
response elements binding protein regulates the expression of PGC1α in the 
context of c-MET inhibition. Interference with both oxidative phosphorylation 
(metformin, oligomycin) and β-oxidation of fatty acids (etomoxir) enhanced the 
antitumor efficacy of c-MET inhibition. Synergistic cell death was observed with 
c-MET inhibition and gamitrinib treatment. In patient-derived xenograft models, 
combination treatments of crizotinib and etomoxir, and crizotinib and gamitrinib 
were significantly more efficacious than single treatments and did not induce 
toxicity. Collectively, we have unraveled the mechanistic underpinnings of c-MET 
inhibition and identified novel combination therapies that may enhance its 
therapeutic efficacy. SIGNIFICANCE: c-MET inhibition causes profound metabolic 
reprogramming that can be targeted by drug combination therapies.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1389
PMCID: PMC6942623
PMID: 31694905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors have 
declared that no conflict of interest exists.
