1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2020 Mar;10(3):356-363. doi: 10.1002/alr.22479. Epub
 2019 Nov 6.

Cigarette smoke extract inhibits cell migration and contraction via the reactive 
oxygen species/adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase pathway in nasal 
fibroblasts.

Shin JM(1)(2)(3)(4), Park JH(1)(2)(3), Yang HW(1)(3), Lee HM(1)(3)(4), Park 
IH(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Upper Airway Chronic inflammatory Diseases Laboratory, Korea University, 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Medical Devices Clinical Trials Laboratory, Korea University, College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)IVD Support Center Korea University, Korea University, College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Korea University, 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Fibroblast migration plays a significant role in wound healing after 
endoscopic sinonasal surgery. Cigarette smoke extract (CSE) is a potent 
inhibitor of fibroblast functions including cell proliferation and migration. 
The purpose of the study was to determine the influence of CSE on migration and 
collagen gel contraction in nasal fibroblasts and investigate its underlying 
mechanisms.
METHODS: Fibroblast migration was evaluated using wound healing assay and 
transwell migration assay. Contractile activity was assessed by collagen gel 
contraction assay. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were quantified by 
2',7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate. Fibroblasts were treated with CSE and 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), metformin, compound C, or transfected with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) to suppress adenosine monophosphate-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) expression. AMPK activation was determined by Western blot.
RESULTS: CSE and metformin were found to significantly reduce the migration and 
collagen gel contraction activity of nasal fibroblasts. Conversely, pretreatment 
with NAC and compound C significantly enhanced the migration and collagen gel 
contraction activity of fibroblasts. ROS production and AMPK phosphorylation 
were found to be significantly induced by CSE treatment, whereas the activity 
was inhibited on treatment with NAC, metformin, compound C, or AMPK siRNA. 
Silencing of AMPK expression was found to significantly reverse the suppressive 
effect of CSE in nasal fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: CSE has an inhibitory effect on cell migration and collagen gel 
contraction activity via the ROS/AMPK signaling pathway in nasal fibroblasts.

© 2019 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.22479
PMID: 31693801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
