1. Int J Fertil Steril. 2020 Jan;13(4):257-270. doi: 10.22074/ijfs.2020.5608.
Epub  2019 Nov 11.

Medical and Surgical Treatment of Reproductive Outcomes in Polycystic Ovary 
Syndrome: An Overview of Systematic Reviews.

Gadalla MA(1)(2), Norman RJ(3)(4), Tay CT, Hiam DS(5), Melder A(3), Pundir J(6), 
Thangaratinam S(7), Teede HJ(3)(4), Mol BWJ(2)(8), Moran LJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Women's Health Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Assiut 
University, Assiut, Egypt.Elevtronic Address:moustafaabdelhafez@yahoo.com.
(2)Robinson Research Institute, Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)Monash Centre for Health Research and Implementation, School of Public Health 
and Preventive Medicine, Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Monash Diabetes and Endocrinology Units, Monash Health, Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(5)Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living, Victoria University, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Centre of Reproductive Medicine, St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Women's Health Research Unit, Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common, complex condition that affects up 
to 18% of reproductiveaged women, causing reproductive, metabolic and 
psychological dysfunctions. We performed an overview and appraisal of 
methodological quality of systematic reviews that assessed medical and surgical 
treatments for reproductive outcomes in women with PCOS. Databases (MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, CINAHL PLUS and PROSPERO) were searched on the 15th of September 2017. 
We included any systematic review that assessed the effect of medical or 
surgical management of PCOS on reproductive, pregnancy and neonatal outcomes. 
Eligibility assessment, data extraction and quality assessment by the Assessing 
the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR) tool were performed in 
duplicate. We identified 53 reviews comprising 44 reviews included in this 
overview; the majority were moderate to high quality. In unselected women with 
PCOS, letrozole was associated with a higher live birth rate than clomiphene 
citrate (CC), while CC was better than metformin or placebo. In women with 
CC-resistant PCOS, gonadotrophins were associated with a higher live birth rate 
than CC plus metformin, which was better than laparoscopic ovarian drilling 
(LOD). LOD was associated with lower multiple pregnancy rates than other medical 
treatments. In women with PCOS undergoing in vitro 
fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection (IVF/ICSI), the addition of 
metformin to gonadotrophins resulted in less ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
(OHSS), and higher pregnancy and live birth rates than gonadotrophins alone. 
Gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist was associated with less OHSS, 
gonadotrophin units and shorter stimulation length than GnRH agonist. Letrozole 
appears to be a good first line treatment and gonadotrophins, as a second line 
treatment, for anovulatory women with PCOS. LOD results in lower multiple 
pregnancy rates. However, due to the heterogeneous nature of the included 
populations of women with PCOS, further larger scale trials are needed with more 
precise assessment of treatments according to heterogeneous variants of PCOS.

Copyright© by Royan Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.22074/ijfs.2020.5608
PMCID: PMC6875858
PMID: 31710185

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
