1. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2020 Apr 1;27(4):279-302. doi: 10.5551/jat.52407. Epub 
2019 Nov 12.

Network Medicine: A Clinical Approach for Precision Medicine and Personalized 
Therapy in Coronary Heart Disease.

Infante T(1), Del Viscovo L(2), De Rimini ML(3), Padula S(4), Caso P(4), Napoli 
C(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Clinical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania 
"Luigi Vanvitelli".
(2)Department of Precision Medicine, Section of Diagnostic Imaging, University 
of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli".
(3)Unit of Nuclear Medicine, A.O.R.N. Dei Colli, Monaldi Hospital.
(4)Department of Cardiology, A.O.R.N. Dei Colli, Monaldi Hospital.
(5)Clinical Department of Internal Medicine and Specialistics, Department of 
Advanced Clinical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli".
(6)IRCCS SDN.

Early identification of coronary atherosclerotic pathogenic mechanisms is useful 
for predicting the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) and future cardiac 
events. Epigenome changes may clarify a significant fraction of this "missing 
hereditability", thus offering novel potential biomarkers for prevention and 
care of CHD. The rapidly growing disciplines of systems biology and network 
science are now poised to meet the fields of precision medicine and personalized 
therapy. Network medicine integrates standard clinical recording and 
non-invasive, advanced cardiac imaging tools with epigenetics into deep learning 
for in-depth CHD molecular phenotyping. This approach could potentially explore 
developing novel drugs from natural compounds (i.e. polyphenols, folic acid) and 
repurposing current drugs, such as statins and metformin. Several clinical 
trials have exploited epigenetic tags and epigenetic sensitive drugs both in 
primary and secondary prevention. Due to their stability in plasma and easiness 
of detection, many ongoing clinical trials are focused on the evaluation of 
circulating miRNAs (e.g. miR-8059 and miR-320a) in blood, in association with 
imaging parameters such as coronary calcifications and stenosis degree detected 
by coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA), or functional parameters 
provided by FFR/CT and PET/CT. Although epigenetic modifications have also been 
prioritized through network based approaches, the whole set of molecular 
interactions (interactome) in CHD is still under investigation for primary 
prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.5551/jat.52407
PMCID: PMC7192819
PMID: 31723086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
