1. Int J Clin Pharm. 2020 Feb;42(1):40-50. doi: 10.1007/s11096-019-00935-y. Epub 
2019 Nov 13.

Benefits, risks and impacts on quality of life of medications used in 
multimorbid older adults: a Delphi study.

Sirois C(1)(2)(3), Lunghi C(4), Berthelot W(5), Laroche ML(6)(7)(8), Frini A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, 
Canada. Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Centre d'excellence sur le vieillissement de Québec, CIUSSS-CN, Hôpital 
St-Sacrement, Local L2-28, 1050, Chemin Ste-Foy, Quebec, QC, G1S 4L8, Canada. 
Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(3)Centre de recherche sur les soins et les services de première ligne de 
l'Université Laval, Quebec, Canada. Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(4)Department of Nursing, UQAR, Lévis, Canada.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Service de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie et Pharmacovigilance, Centre Régional 
de Pharmacovigilance, de Pharmacoépidémiologie et d'information sur les 
médicaments, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Limoges, Limoges, France.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Limoges University, Limoges, France.
(8)INSERM 1248, Limoges University, Limoges, France.
(9)Department of Management, UQAR, Lévis, Canada.

Background Multimorbidity and polypharmacy are common in older people. Despite 
the existence of quality criteria for medication use among this population, 
there is little guidance for managing the complex pharmacological arsenal in a 
multimorbidity context. Objective To establish consensus on benefits, risks and 
impacts on quality of life of medications used in an older adult with three 
chronic diseases that require complex pharmacotherapy. Setting International 
experts in pharmacology. Method A panel of experts responded to three rounds of 
a Delphi survey. They assessed the benefits, risks and positive impacts on 
quality of life of 50 different medications or medication classes that could be 
used by a hypothetical multimorbid older patient aged 65-75 years, with type 2 
diabetes, heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Each aspect 
was evaluated on a 5-level Likert scale. Main outcome measure Percentage of 
agreement on each of the three aspects for all medication. Results Consensus was 
reached on 95% of items (166/174). Only two medication classes were associated 
with both the highest category of benefits and positive impacts on quality of 
life, and the lowest risk category: long-acting anticholinergics and long-acting 
beta-2-agonists. Nine other medications/classes of medications were categorized 
within the highest benefits level (metformin, DPP-4-inhibitors, short-acting 
beta-2-agonists, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, warfarin, non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants, nitrates and acetaminophen). Fifteen medications were included 
in the highest level of risks, among which warfarin and Non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants. Conclusions Medications recommended in clinical guidelines for 
individual diseases are generally considered positive for multimorbid older 
patients. Nevertheless, a non-negligible number of medications was deemed 
negative or very negative by our panelists. For multimorbid patients, 
individualizing treatment according to their preferences seems of utmost 
importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s11096-019-00935-y
PMID: 31721038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
