1. J Diabetes Investig. 2020 May;11(3):640-646. doi: 10.1111/jdi.13182. Epub 2019
 Dec 27.

Factors associated with the glucose-lowering efficacy of sitagliptin in Japanese 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: Pooled analysis of Japanese clinical 
trials.

Tajima N(1), Eiki JI(2), Okamoto T(2), Okuyama K(2), Kawashima M(3), Engel 
SS(4).

Author information:
(1)Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Medical Affairs, and Japan Development, MSD K.K., Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Medical Affairs, ONO Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.
(4)Clinical Research, Merck & Co., Inc, Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA.

AIMS/INTRODUCTION: To explore the factors associated with the glucose-lowering 
efficacy of sitagliptin treatment in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a post-hoc analysis of pooled data from seven 
sitagliptin phase II and III clinical studies carried out in Japan. All studies 
were double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group and of 12-week 
duration. The analysis population consisted of 1,075 type 2 diabetes mellitus 
patients. In two of the trials, sitagliptin 50 mg and/or 100 mg daily were used 
as monotherapy; in five others, sitagliptin 50 mg daily was used as add-on 
treatment to ongoing pioglitazone, glimepiride, metformin, voglibose or 
glinides. Efficacy (reduction in hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c]) was evaluated in 12 
sets of subgroups defined by demographic, glycemic, pancreatic β-cell function 
and insulin resistance parameters. An analysis of covariance model was used to 
evaluate the interaction between each parameter and efficacy.
RESULTS: Sitagliptin consistently provided a clinically meaningful reduction in 
HbA1c relative to placebo across all subgroups. Within subgroups, a greater 
absolute HbA1c reduction was associated with higher baseline HbA1c, fasting 
plasma glucose and 2-h post-meal glucose. Lower β-cell function, represented by 
homeostatic model assessment of β-cell function and insulinogenic index, was 
also associated with greater HbA1c reduction. In contrast, age, sex, body mass 
index, duration of type 2 diabetes mellitus and insulin resistance-related 
parameters did not interact with HbA1c changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Sitagliptin treatment was associated with clinically meaningful 
improvement in glycemic control in all subgroups of Japanese patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus that were evaluated. Higher baseline glycemic status 
and lower baseline β-cell function were identified as factors associated with 
greater HbA1c reduction after sitagliptin treatment.

© 2019 Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by 
Asian Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons 
Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.13182
PMCID: PMC7232313
PMID: 31743602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NT has received lecturing fees from Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Company Limited and Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd. JE, TO, 
KO and SSE are employees of MSD K.K., Tokyo, Japan or Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., 
a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA, and may own stock and/or 
hold stock options in Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA. MK is an employee 
of ONO Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
