1. J Endod. 2020 Jan;46(1):65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2019.10.001. Epub 2019 Nov 
18.

Intracanal Metformin Promotes Healing of Apical Periodontitis via Suppressing 
Inducible Nitric Oxide Synthase Expression and Monocyte Recruitment.

Wang HW(1), Lai EH(2), Yang CN(3), Lin SK(2), Hong CY(4), Yang H(5), Chang 
JZ(2), Kok SH(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Dentistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; College of Bio-Resources and Agriculture, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: shkok@ntu.edu.tw.

INTRODUCTION: We have previously shown that intracanal metformin ameliorates 
apical periodontitis, partially by modulation of osteoblast apoptosis. The 
action of metformin on other cell types pertinent to the development of apical 
periodontitis needs to be examined. In the present study, we aimed to analyze 
whether its effects on the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) 
and monocyte recruitment contribute to the therapeutic effect on apical 
periodontitis.
METHODS: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced expression of iNOS in a human 
monocytic cell line, Mono-Mac-6, was assessed by Western blot. The amount of 
nitrite in culture medium was assessed to quantify nitric oxide (NO) production. 
C-C motif chemokine ligand-2 (CCL-2) synthesis was measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Experimental apical periodontitis in rats was treated with 
root canal debridement with or without intracanal metformin medication. Lesion 
progression was assessed by conventional radiography and micro-computed 
tomographic imaging. Cellular expression of iNOS and the number of 
monocytes/macrophages were assessed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Metformin suppressed LPS-induced iNOS and NO production by monocytes. 
More importantly, metformin inhibited LPS-enhanced CCL-2 synthesis through 
modulation of the iNOS/NO pathway. Intracanal metformin reduced bone resorption 
associated with apical periodontitis and suppressed iNOS expression and monocyte 
recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirmed the therapeutic efficacy of intracanal 
metformin for apical periodontitis. Suppression of monocyte recruitment through 
modulation of iNOS expression and NO production is an important mechanism 
underlying the beneficial effect of metformin.

Copyright © 2019 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2019.10.001
PMID: 31753516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
