1. Diabet Med. 2020 Feb;37(2):194-202. doi: 10.1111/dme.14179. Epub 2020 Jan 3.

More recent, better designed studies have weakened links between antidiabetes 
medications and cancer risk.

Dankner R(1)(2)(3), Roth J(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Unit for Cardiovascular Epidemiology, Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and 
Health Policy Research, Sheba Medical Centre, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, School of Public Health, Department of 
Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(3)Patient Oriented Research, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North 
Shore, NY, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Diabetes and Diabetes-Related Disorders, North Shore, NY, USA.
(5)Centre for Biomedical Science and Centre for Bioelectric Medicine, Feinstein 
Institute for Medical Research Manhasset, Northwell Health, North Shore, NY, 
USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of studies have investigated associations of 
antidiabetes medications with cancer risk. Antidiabetes medications are 
classified by their mechanisms of action on tissues and organs. They potentially 
act as both causative and confounding factors in the temporal association of 
diabetes and cancer.
AIM: To present the current evidence regarding both the carcinogenic and 
anti-carcinogenic effects of antidiabetes medications on cancer in humans.
METHODS: A review of the scientific literature.
RESULTS: The most conclusive evidence shown of an association of antidiabetes 
medication with a specific cancer was for that of the thiazolidinedione 
pioglitazone with bladder cancer. Currently, there is inconclusive evidence 
regarding a possible association of incretin therapies, drugs of the dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4 inhibitor class, with the risk of pancreatic cancer. Insulin, 
sulfonylureas, metformin and sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors appear 
not to be associated with increased risk of any cancer. Sparse evidence suggests 
possible protective effects against cancer incidence of metformin, 
sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, incretin-based drugs and sodium-glucose 
co-transporter-2 inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: The conflicting evidence regarding associations of antidiabetes 
medications with cancer risk is apparently attributable to both methodological 
issues and to the complexity of the subject. More recent and better-designed 
studies have weakened the evidence for links between antidiabetes medications 
and cancer risk.

© 2019 Diabetes UK.

DOI: 10.1111/dme.14179
PMID: 31769894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
