1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2020 Mar 1;1866(3):165610. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165610. Epub 2019 Nov 25.

Metformin reduces TRPC6 expression through AMPK activation and modulates 
cytoskeleton dynamics in podocytes under diabetic conditions.

Szrejder M(1), Rachubik P(1), Rogacka D(2), Audzeyenka I(2), Rychłowski M(3), 
Kreft E(1), Angielski S(1), Piwkowska A(4).

Author information:
(1)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of 
Molecular and Cellular Nephrology, Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of 
Molecular and Cellular Nephrology, Gdańsk, Poland; University of Gdańsk, Faculty 
of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Poland.
(3)University of Gdańsk - Medical University of Gdańsk, Intercollegiate Faculty 
of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Virus Molecular Biology, Poland.
(4)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of 
Molecular and Cellular Nephrology, Gdańsk, Poland; University of Gdańsk, Faculty 
of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Poland. Electronic address: 
apiwkowska@imdik.pan.pl.

Podocytes have foot processes that comprise an important cellular layer of the 
glomerular barrier involved in regulating glomerular permeability. The 
disturbance of podocyte function plays a central role in the development of 
proteinuria in diabetic nephropathy. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a key 
regulator of glucose and fatty acid metabolism, plays a major role in obesity 
and type 2 diabetes. Accumulating evidence suggests that TRPC6 channels are 
crucial mediators of calcium transport in podocytes, and these channels are 
involved in disturbing the glomerular filtration barrier in diabetes. Metformin 
is an anti-diabetic drug widely used for treating patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Recent studies have suggested that the therapeutic effect of metformin might be 
mediated by AMPK. The precise function of metformin on cellular function and 
intracellular signaling in podocytes under diabetic conditions is not fully 
understood. In this study, we demonstrated that metformin normalized TRPC6 
expression via AMPKα1 activation in podocytes exposed to high glucose 
concentrations. A quantitative analysis showed that metformin increased the 
colocalization of TRPC6 and AMPKα1 subunits from 42% to 61% in standard glucose 
(SG) medium and from 29% to 52% in high glucose (HG) medium. AMPK activation was 
also necessary for maintaining appropriate levels of Rho-family small GTPase 
activity in HG conditions. Moreover, metformin through AMPK activation remodeled 
cytoskeleton dynamics, and consequently, reduced filtration barrier permeability 
in diabetic conditions.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165610
PMID: 31778750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
