1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2020 Mar 1;1866(3):165621. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165621. Epub 2019 Nov 29.

Protective effect of metformin against palmitate-induced hepatic cell death.

Geng Y(1), Hernández Villanueva A(2), Oun A(3), Buist-Homan M(4), Blokzijl H(5), 
Faber KN(6), Dolga A(7), Moshage H(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: y.geng@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: a.a.hernandez.villanueva@umcg.nl.
(3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: a.a.a.oun@rug.nl.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: m.buist-homan@umcg.nl.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: h.blokzijl@umcg.nl.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: k.n.faber@umcg.nl.
(7)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: a.m.dolga@rug.nl.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: a.j.moshage@umcg.nl.

Lipotoxicity causes hepatic cell death and therefore plays an important role in 
the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Metformin, a 
first-line anti-diabetic drug, has shown a potential protective effect against 
NAFLD. However, the underlying mechanism is still not clear. In this study, we 
aim to understand the molecular mechanism of the protective effect of metformin 
in NAFLD, focusing on lipotoxicity. Cell death was studied in HepG2 cells and 
primary rat hepatocytes exposed to palmitate and metformin. Metformin 
ameliorated palmitate-induced necrosis and apoptosis (decreased caspase-3/7 
activity by 52% and 57% respectively) in HepG2 cells. Metformin also reduced 
palmitate-induced necrosis in primary rat hepatocytes (P < 0.05). The protective 
effect of metformin is not due to reducing intracellular lipid content or 
activation of AMPK signaling pathways. Metformin and a low concentration 
(0.1 μmol/L) of rotenone showed moderate inhibition on mitochondrial respiration 
indicated by reduced basal and maximal mitochondrial respiration and proton leak 
in HepG2 cells. Moreover, metformin and rotenone (0.1 μmol/L) preserved 
mitochondrial membrane potential in both HepG2 cells and primary rat 
hepatocytes. In addition, metformin and rotenone (0.1 μmol/L) also reduces 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and increase superoxide dismutase 2 
(SOD2) expression. Our results establish that metformin AMPK-independently 
protects against palmitate-induced hepatic cell death by moderate inhibition of 
the mitochondrial respiratory chain, recovering mitochondrial function, 
decreasing cellular ROS production, and inducing SOD2 expression, indicating 
that metformin may have beneficial actions beyond its glucose-lowering effect 
and also suggests that mitochondrial complex І may be a therapeutic target in 
NAFLD.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165621
PMID: 31786336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
