1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2020 Jan;159:107951. doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2019.107951. Epub 2019 Nov 29.

Disparities in gastric emptying and postprandial glycaemia between Han Chinese 
and Caucasians with type 2 diabetes.

Wang X(1), Xie C(2), Marathe CS(2), Malbert CH(3), Horowitz M(2), Jones KL(2), 
Rayner CK(2), Sun Z(4), Wu T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Institute of Diabetes, School 
of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China; Adelaide Medical School and 
Centre of Research Excellence in Translating Nutritional Science to Good Health, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(2)Adelaide Medical School and Centre of Research Excellence in Translating 
Nutritional Science to Good Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)Aniscan Unit, Department of Human Nutrition, INRA, Saint-Gilles, France.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Institute of Diabetes, School 
of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: 
sunzilin1963@126.com.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Institute of Diabetes, School 
of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China; Adelaide Medical School and 
Centre of Research Excellence in Translating Nutritional Science to Good Health, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Electronic address: 
tongzhi.wu@gmail.com.

AIMS: Gastric emptying is a major determinant of postprandial glycaemia in both 
health and type 2 diabetes (T2DM); the potential impact of ethnicity on gastric 
emptying is unclear. We compared the rate of gastric emptying of a standardised 
meal and the associated glycaemic response in Han Chinese and Caucasian patients 
with T2DM.
METHODS: 14 Han Chinese and 14 Caucasian T2DM patients, managed by diet and/or 
metformin monotherapy, underwent concurrent measurements of gastric emptying and 
blood glucose for 240 min after a 99mTc-calcium phytate-labelled mashed potato 
meal.
RESULTS: Han Chinese patients were slightly younger (P < 0.05), and had a lower 
BMI (P < 0.05), than Caucasians. There were no differences in either HbA1c or 
fasting blood glucose between them. Gastric half-emptying time (T50) was shorter 
(P < 0.05) and the postprandial blood glucose increment greater (P < 0.05) in 
Han Chinese than Caucasian patients. Both the increment in blood glucose from 
baseline at 60 min and peak blood glucose were related inversely to T50 
(P < 0.05 each).
CONCLUSIONS: Han Chinese with relatively well-controlled T2DM have more rapid 
gastric emptying compared to Caucasians, which is associated with a greater 
postprandial glycaemic excursion. These differences may inform the choice of 
management, e.g. Han Chinese may particularly benefit from therapies that slow 
gastric emptying.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2019.107951
PMID: 31790715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest MH has 
participated in advisory boards and/or symposia for Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, 
Novartis, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim, and AstraZeneca 
and has received honoraria for this activity. KLJ has received research funding 
from Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Omniblend Innovations and trial medication from Merck 
Sharp & Dohme. CKR has received research funding from AstraZeneca, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, Eli Lilly, Novartis, and Sanofi. ZS has received research funding from 
AstraZeneca. TW has received research funding from Novartis and AstraZeneca. 
None of the other authors has any personal or financial conflict of interest to 
declare.
