1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Apr;22(4):599-611. doi: 10.1111/dom.13935. Epub 2019
 Dec 26.

Effects of sequential treatment with lixisenatide, insulin glargine, or their 
combination on meal-related glycaemic excursions, insulin and glucagon 
secretion, and gastric emptying in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Meier JJ(1), Menge BA(1), Schenker N(1), Erdmann S(1), Kahle-Stephan M(1), 
Schliess F(2), Kapitza C(2), Nauck MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Center Bochum-Hattingen, St. Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, 
Bochum, Germany.
(2)Profil Institut für Stoffwechselforschung, Neuss, Germany.

AIM: To examine the glucose-lowering mechanisms of the glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor agonist lixisenatide after two subsequent meals and in combination with 
basal insulin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-eight metformin-treated patients with type 2 
diabetes were randomly assigned to treatment sequences with either lixisenatide 
or insulin glargine alone for 4 weeks, and a combination of both treatments for 
4 weeks. Metabolic examinations were performed before and after each treatment 
period following breakfast and a late lunch 8 hours later.
RESULTS: Lixisenatide mainly reduced postprandial glycaemia, while insulin 
glargine mainly reduced fasting glucose after breakfast (P < 0.05). This was 
partially preserved after a late lunch (P < 0.05). After breakfast, lixisenatide 
reduced insulin secretion and glucagon levels significantly. These effects were 
lost after a late lunch. Insulin glargine did not significantly reduce glucagon 
or insulin secretion. Gastric emptying was slowed by lixisenatide, but not by 
insulin glargine after breakfast. After the late lunch, lixisenatide slightly 
accelerated gastric emptying.
CONCLUSIONS: Lixisenatide decelerates gastric emptying after breakfast, thereby 
reducing glycaemic excursions, insulin secretion and glucagon levels. The 
glycaemic reduction persists until after a late lunch, despite accelerated 
gastric emptying. The combination with insulin glargine enhances the 
glucose-lowering effect because of complementary modes of action.

© 2019 The Authors. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13935
PMID: 31793165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
