1. Anal Chem. 2020 Jan 21;92(2):1856-1864. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03811.
Epub  2020 Jan 7.

Dose-Response Metabolomics To Understand Biochemical Mechanisms and Off-Target 
Drug Effects with the TOXcms Software.

Yao CH, Wang L, Stancliffe E, Sindelar M, Cho K, Yin W(1), Wang Y, Patti GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics , University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte , Charlotte , North Carolina 28223 , United States.

Small-molecule drugs and toxicants commonly interact with more than a single 
protein target, each of which may have unique effects on cellular phenotype. 
Although untargeted metabolomics is often applied to understand the mode of 
action of these chemicals, simple pairwise comparisons of treated and untreated 
samples are insufficient to resolve the effects of disrupting two or more 
independent protein targets. Here, we introduce a workflow for dose-response 
metabolomics to evaluate chemicals that potentially affect multiple proteins 
with different potencies. Our approach relies on treating samples with various 
concentrations of compound prior to analysis with mass spectrometry-based 
metabolomics. Data are then processed with software we developed called TOXcms, 
which statistically evaluates dose-response trends for each metabolomic signal 
according to user-defined tolerances and subsequently groups those that follow 
the same pattern. Although TOXcms was built upon the XCMS framework, it is 
compatible with any metabolomic data-processing software. Additionally, to 
enable correlation of dose responses beyond those that can be measured by 
metabolomics, TOXcms also accepts data from respirometry, cell death assays, 
other omic platforms, etc. In this work, we primarily focus on applying 
dose-response metabolomics to find off-target effects of drugs. Using metformin 
and etomoxir as examples, we demonstrate that each group of dose-response 
patterns identified by TOXcms signifies a metabolic response to a different 
protein target with a unique drug binding affinity. TOXcms is freely available 
on our laboratory website at http://pattilab.wustl.edu/software/toxcms .

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03811
PMCID: PMC7354698
PMID: 31804057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
