1. Br J Cancer. 2020 Jan;122(1):62-71. doi: 10.1038/s41416-019-0627-y. Epub 2019 
Dec 10.

Hypoxia and hyperglycaemia determine why some endometrial tumours fail to 
respond to metformin.

Sivalingam VN(#)(1)(2), Latif A(#)(3), Kitson S(1)(2), McVey R(4), Finegan 
KG(3), Marshall K(3), Lisanti MP(5), Sotgia F(5), Stratford IJ(3), Crosbie 
EJ(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Sciences, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
UK.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(3)Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of 
Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Histopathology, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(5)School of Environmental & Life Sciences, University of Salford, Salford, UK.
(6)Division of Cancer Sciences, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
UK. emma.crosbie@manchester.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK. 
emma.crosbie@manchester.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: High expression of Ki67, a proliferation marker, is associated with 
reduced endometrial cancer-specific survival. Pre-surgical metformin reduces 
tumour Ki-67 expression in some women with endometrial cancer. Metformin's 
anti-cancer activity may relate to effects on cellular energy metabolism. Since 
tumour hypoxia and glucose availability are major cellular redox determinants, 
we evaluated their role in endometrial cancer response to metformin.
METHODS: Endometrial cancer biopsies from women treated with pre-surgical 
metformin were tested for the hypoxia markers, HIF-1α and CA-9. Endometrial 
cancer cell lines were treated with metformin in variable glucose concentrations 
in normoxia or hypoxia and cell viability, mitochondrial biogenesis, function 
and energy metabolism were assessed.
RESULTS: In women treated with metformin (n = 28), Ki-67 response was lower in 
hypoxic tumours. Metformin showed minimal cytostatic effects towards Ishikawa 
and HEC1A cells in conventional medium (25 mM glucose). In low glucose (5.5 mM), 
a dose-dependent cytostatic effect was observed in normoxia but attenuated in 
hypoxia. Tumours treated with metformin showed increased mitochondrial mass 
(n = 25), while in cultured cells metformin decreased mitochondrial function. 
Metformin targets mitochondrial respiration, however, in hypoxic, high glucose 
conditions, there was a switch to glycolytic metabolism and decreased metformin 
response.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the metabolic adaptations of endometrial tumours may 
identify patients likely to derive clinical benefit from metformin.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-019-0627-y
PMCID: PMC6964676
PMID: 31819173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
