1. Diabetes Metab. 2020 Apr;46(2):164-168. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2019.11.005.
Epub  2019 Dec 6.

Effects of 12-week treatment with dapagliflozin and gliclazide on faecal 
microbiome: Results of a double-blind randomized trial in patients with type 2 
diabetes.

van Bommel EJM(1), Herrema H(2), Davids M(2), Kramer MHH(3), Nieuwdorp M(2), van 
Raalte DH(4).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centres, VUmc, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
e.vanbommel@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal and Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centres, AMC, The Netherlands.
(3)Diabetes Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centres, VUmc, The Netherlands.
(4)Diabetes Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centres, VUmc, The Netherlands; Department of Internal and Vascular 
Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, AMC, The Netherlands.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) are usually treated with 
(combinations of) glucose-lowering medication. The effects of these drugs can be 
influenced by intestinal microbiota and vice versa, as these drugs can also 
influence microbiome composition. However, as there is currently little clinical 
insight into this bug-drug interaction, our study aimed to evaluate the effects 
of 12-week treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin and sulphonylurea 
gliclazide on gut microbiome composition in T2D patients treated with metformin.
METHODS: A total of 44 patients were randomized to either dapagliflozin or 
gliclazide treatment for 12 weeks. At baseline and after 12 weeks, faecal 
samples and 24-h urine were collected. During study visits, anthropometric data 
were measured and blood samples drawn after an overnight fast. Microbiome 
composition was determined by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Plasma glucose, insulin, 
HbA1c and urinary glucose excretion were measured using conventional methods.
RESULTS: While dapagliflozin and gliclazide similarly improved glycaemic 
control, dapagliflozin reduced and gliclazide increased fasting insulin. 
Dapagliflozin also greatly increased urinary glucose excretion whereas 
gliclazide did not, while body mass index, fat mass percentage and waist 
circumference were reduced by dapagliflozin, but increased by gliclazide. 
However, neither treatment significantly affected either gut microbiome alpha 
diversity or composition and, after treatment, no associations were found 
between microbiome composition and other clinical parameters.
CONCLUSION: Even though gliclazide and dapagliflozin have different metabolic 
actions in patients with T2D, neither treatment altered the faecal microbiome, 
thereby suggesting that the observed metabolic changes are not mediated by their 
effects on the microbiota.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabet.2019.11.005
PMID: 31816432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
