1. Andrology. 2020 May;8(3):731-746. doi: 10.1111/andr.12739. Epub 2019 Dec 22.

Malaysian propolis and metformin mitigate subfertility in streptozotocin-induced 
diabetic male rats by targeting steroidogenesis, testicular lactate transport, 
spermatogenesis and mating behaviour.

Nna VU(1)(2), Bakar ABA(1), Ahmad A(3), Umar UZ(4), Suleiman JB(1)(5), Zakaria 
Z(1), Othman ZA(1)(6), Mohamed M(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains 
Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, College of 
Medical Sciences, University of Calabar, Calabar, Nigeria.
(3)Basic Science and Oral Biology Unit, School of Dental Sciences, Universiti 
Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Physiology, College of Health Sciences, Usman Danfodiyo 
University, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Science Laboratory Technology, Akanu Ibiam Federal Polytechnic, 
Unwana, Nigeria.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University Sultan Zainal Abidin, Kuala Terengganu, 
Malaysia.
(7)Unit of Integrative Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains 
Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is one of the risk factors for male 
subfertility/infertility. Malaysian propolis is reported to decrease 
hyperglycaemia in diabetic state.
OBJECTIVES: The present study investigated the protective effect of Malaysian 
propolis on diabetes-induced subfertility/infertility. Additionally, its 
combined beneficial effects with metformin were investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty adult male Sprague Dawley rats were randomly 
assigned into five groups, namely normal control, diabetic control, 
diabetic + Malaysian propolis (300 mg/k.g. b.w.), diabetic + metformin 
(300 mg/kg b.w.) and diabetic + Malaysian propolis + metformin. Diabetes was 
induced using a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (60 mg/kg 
b.w.) and treatment lasted for 4 weeks. During the 4th week, mating behavioural 
experiments were performed using sexually receptive female rats. Thereafter, 
fertility parameters were assessed in the female rats.
RESULTS: Malaysian propolis increased serum and intratesticular free 
testosterone levels, up-regulated the mRNA levels of AR and luteinizing hormone 
receptor, up-regulated the mRNA and protein levels of StAR, CYP11A1, CYP17A1, 
3β-HSD and 17β-HSD in the testes of diabetic rats. Furthermore, Malaysian 
propolis up-regulated testicular MCT2, MCT4 and lactate dehydrogenase type C 
mRNA levels, in addition to improving sperm parameters (count, motility, 
viability and normal morphology) and decreasing sperm nDNA fragmentation in 
diabetic rats. Malaysian propolis improved mating behaviour by increasing penile 
guanosine monophosphate levels. Malaysian propolis also improved fertility 
outcome as seen with decreases in pre- and post-implantation losses, increases 
in gravid uterine weight, litter size per dam and foetal weight. Malaysian 
propolis's effects were comparable to metformin. However, their combination 
yielded better results relative to the monotherapeutic interventions.
CONCLUSION: Malaysian propolis improves fertility potential in diabetic state by 
targeting steroidogenesis, testicular lactate metabolism, spermatogenesis and 
mating behaviour, with better effects when co-administered with metformin. 
Therefore, Malaysian propolis shows a promising complementary effect with 
metformin in mitigating Diabetes mellitus-induced subfertility/infertility.

© 2019 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/andr.12739
PMID: 31816190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
