1. J Clin Periodontol. 2020 Jul;47 Suppl 22:199-238. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13232.

The adjunctive use of host modulators in non-surgical periodontal therapy. A 
systematic review of randomized, placebo-controlled clinical studies.

Donos N(1), Calciolari E(1), Brusselaers N(2), Goldoni M(3), Bostanci N(4), 
Belibasakis GN(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Oral Immunobiology & Regenerative Medicine & Centre for Oral 
Clinical Research, Barts and The London School of Medicine & Dentistry, 
Institute of Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London (QMUL), London, UK.
(2)Centre of Translational Microbiome Research, Department of Microbiology, 
Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(4)Division of Oral Diseases, Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Considering the role of the inflammatory host response in the 
pathogenesis of periodontitis, different host modulators have been proposed to 
enhance the outcomes of non-surgical periodontal therapy (NSPT), but their 
efficacy has not been fully clarified.
OBJECTIVES: This systematic review investigated the efficacy of host modulators 
combined with NSPT in reducing probing pocket depth (PPD) in periodontitis 
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Placebo-controlled RCTs with ≥6 months follow-up were 
searched. Meta-analysis was conducted when ≥5 studies using the same host 
modulator were identified.
RESULTS: Fifty eight studies met the inclusion criteria. After 6 months, local 
administration of 1.2% statin gels as adjuncts to NSPT significantly improved 
PPD reduction (1.83 mm) in infrabony defects and systemic administration of 
sub-antimicrobial dose doxycycline (SDD) in addition to NSPT improved PPD 
reduction of deep pockets. Administration of probiotics conferred limited 
clinical benefits. Local bisphosphonate and metformin gels showed potential for 
clinical use in infrabony defects, which needs to be confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: Local delivery of statins in infrabony defects and systemic SDD for 
deep pockets may confer additional clinical benefits to NSPT. Their long-term 
effectiveness and safety need to be confirmed in independent multi-centred 
studies. Further studies are needed to confirm the benefit of other host 
modulators.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13232
PMID: 31834951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
