1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2020 Jan 2;52(1):72-83. doi: 
10.1093/abbs/gmz142.

Resveratrol attenuates diabetes-associated cell centrosome amplification via 
inhibiting the PKCα-p38 to c-myc/c-jun pathway.

Wu Q(1), Chen X(1), He Q(1), Lang L(1), Xu P(1), Wang P(1), Lee SC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China, and.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou 221116, China.

Type 2 diabetes increases the risk for cancer. Centrosome amplification can 
initiate tumorigenesis. We have described that type 2 diabetes increases the 
centrosome amplification of peripheral blood mononuclear cells, with high 
glucose, insulin, and palmitic acid as the triggers, which suggests that 
centrosome amplification is a candidate biological mechanism linking diabetes to 
cancer. In this study, we aimed to further investigate the signaling pathways of 
the diabetes-associated centrosome amplification and to examine whether and how 
resveratrol inhibits the centrosome amplification. The results showed that 
treatment with high glucose, insulin, and palmitic acid, alone or in 
combination, could increase the protein levels of phospho-protein kinase C alpha 
(p-PKCα), phospho-p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (p-p38), c-myc, and 
c-jun, as well as the mRNA levels of c-myc and c-jun. PKCα inhibitor could 
inhibit the treatment-induced increase in the protein levels of p-p38, c-myc, 
and c-jun. Inhibitor or siRNA of p38 was also able to inhibit the 
treatment-induced increase in the levels of p-p38, c-myc, and c-jun. Meanwhile, 
knockdown of c-myc or c-jun did not alter the treatment-induced increase in the 
phosphorylation of PKCα or p38. Importantly, inhibition of the phosphorylation 
of PKCα or p38 and knockdown of c-myc or c-jun could attenuate the centrosome 
amplification. In diabetic mice, the levels of p-PKCα, p-p38, c-myc, and c-jun 
were all increased in the colon tissues. Interestingly, resveratrol, but not 
metformin, was able to attenuate the treatment-induced increase in the levels of 
p-PKCα, p-p38, c-myc, and c-jun, as well as the centrosome amplification. In 
conclusion, our results suggest that PKCα-p38 to c-myc/c-jun is the signaling 
pathway of the diabetes-associated centrosome amplification, and resveratrol 
attenuates the centrosome amplification by inhibiting this signaling pathway.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmz142
PMID: 31844893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
