1. Pharmacol Res. 2020 Feb;152:104593. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2019.104593. Epub 2019
 Dec 13.

Emerging neuroprotective effect of metformin in Parkinson's disease: A molecular 
crosstalk.

Paudel YN(1), Angelopoulou E(2), Piperi C(3), Shaikh MF(4), Othman I(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia. 
Electronic address: yam.paudel@monash.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: angelthal@med.uoa.gr.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: cpiperi@med.uoa.gr.
(4)Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia. 
Electronic address: Farooq.shaikh@monash.edu.
(5)Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia. 
Electronic address: iekhsan.othman@monash.edu.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and Lewy pathology. PD is a major concern of today's 
aging population and has emerged as a global health burden. Despite the rapid 
advances in PD research over the past decades, the gold standard therapy 
provides only symptomatic relief and fails to halt disease progression. 
Therefore, exploring novel disease-modifying therapeutic strategies is highly 
demanded. Metformin, which is currently used as a first-line therapy for type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM), has recently demonstrated to exert a neuroprotective 
role in several neurodegenerative disorders including PD, both in vitro and in 
vivo. In this review, we explore the neuroprotective potential of metformin 
based on emerging evidence from pre-clinical and clinical studies. Regarding the 
underlying molecular mechanisms, metformin has been shown to inhibit α-synuclein 
(SNCA) phosphorylation and aggregation, prevent mitochondrial dysfunction, 
attenuate oxidative stress, modulate autophagy mainly via AMP-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) activation, as well as prevent neurodegeneration and 
neuroinflammation. Overall, the neuroprotective effects of metformin in PD 
pathogenesis present a novel promising therapeutic strategy that might overcome 
the limitations of current PD treatment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2019.104593
PMID: 31843673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All the 
authors declare no potential conflict of interest.
