1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Apr;22(4):658-668. doi: 10.1111/dom.13944. Epub 2020
 Jan 27.

Benefits of insulin degludec/liraglutide are maintained even in patients 
discontinuing sulphonylureas or dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors upon 
initiation of degludec/liraglutide therapy: A post hoc analysis of the DUAL II 
and DUAL IX trials.

Janez A(1), Őrsy P(2), Stachlewska K(2), Salvesen-Sykes K(3), Billings LK(4), 
Philis-Tsimikas A(5).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Novo Nordisk A/S, Søborg, Denmark.
(3)Novo Nordisk Inc., Plainsboro, New, Jersey.
(4)NorthShore University Health System/University of Chicago Pritzker School of 
Medicine, Skokie, Illinois.
(5)Scripps Whittier Diabetes Institute, San Diego, California.

AIM: To investigate the efficacy and safety of initiating insulin 
degludec/liraglutide (IDegLira) in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) who had 
discontinued pretrial sulphonylureas (SUs) or dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors 
(DPP4is) versus patients not previously treated with these regimens.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In DUAL II, patients with T2D uncontrolled on basal 
insulin and metformin ± SU/glinides were randomized to insulin degludec or 
IDegLira (both capped at 50 U). In DUAL IX, patients were randomized to insulin 
glargine U100 (no maximum dose) or IDegLira, as add-on to sodium-glucose 
co-transporter-2 inhibitors ± oral antidiabetic drugs. In this post hoc 
analysis, patients were grouped according to pretrial use of SU (DUAL II) or 
DPP4i (DUAL IX).
RESULTS: Regardless of pretrial SU/DPP4i use, IDegLira was favourable versus 
insulin comparators with respect to change in HbA1c and body weight. Lower 
hypoglycaemia rates and comparable end-of-trial daily insulin dose were achieved 
with IDegLira, regardless of pretrial regimen. There was no clinically relevant 
increase in mean self-measured blood glucose in the early weeks after IDegLira 
initiation. There was no statistically significant interaction between the 
randomized treatments and previous SU/DPP4i use.
CONCLUSIONS: IDegLira was more favourable compared with degludec or glargine 
U100 in terms of change in HbA1c and body weight, regardless of antecedent 
treatment. Clinicians should be aware of a potential transient rise in 
self-measured blood glucose when transitioning therapy in patients. This shows 
that SUs/DPP4is can be safely discontinued, without deterioration in glycaemic 
control when initiating IDegLira, allowing a simplified treatment regimen.

© 2019 The Authors. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13944
PMCID: PMC7079143
PMID: 31858673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.J. has served as a consultant and is on the 
speakers’ bureau for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novo 
Nordisk and Sanofi. P.O. and K.S.S. are employees and shareholders in Novo 
Nordisk. K.S. is an employee of Novo Nordisk. A.P.T. receives funding for 
advisory boards from Scripps Health, and research and education programmes from 
AZ, Dexcom, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi; no direct or indirect 
reimbursement is provided to the author. L.K.B. receives consulting fees from 
Sanofi, Dexcom, Eli Lilly and Novo Nordisk, research support from Novo Nordisk 
and participates in the speakers’ bureau for Novo Nordisk.
