1. Bone. 2020 Mar;132:115193. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.115193. Epub 2019 Dec 17.

Skeletal effects of plyometric exercise and metformin in ovariectomized rats.

Stunes AK(1), Erben RG(2), Schüler C(2), Eriksen EF(3), Tice M(4), Vashishth 
D(4), Syversen U(5), Mosti MP(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway; St. Olavs University Hospital, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center for Biotechnology and 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway; Department of Endocrinology, St Olavs 
University Hospital HF, Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway; St. Olavs University Hospital, 
Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address: mats.p.mosti@ntnu.no.

Estrogen deficiency causes bone loss and skeletal muscle dysfunction, and 
attenuates the musculoskeletal effects of exercise. The anti-diabetic drug 
metformin has been suggested to promote beneficial skeletal effects. To explore 
whether metformin can improve musculoskeletal training response during estrogen 
deficiency, we investigated the skeletal effects of plyometric exercise and 
metformin, in an ovarectomized (OVX) rat model of osteoporosis. Female Sprague 
Dawley rats, 12 weeks of age, rats were allocated to a sham-operated group 
(Sham), and four OVX groups; metformin (OVX-Met), exercise (OVX-Ex), combined 
metformin and exercise (OVX-MetEx) and a control group (OVX-Ctr), n = 12/group. 
Dual X-ray absorptiometry, micro computed tomography, fracture toughness 
testing, histomorphometry and plasma analyses were performed to explore skeletal 
effects. All intervention groups exhibited a higher gain in femoral bone mineral 
density (BMD) than OVX-Ctr (p < .01). The combined intervention also resulted in 
a higher gain in femoral and spine BMD compared to OVX-Met (p < .01). Both 
exercise groups displayed improved microarchitecture, including both cortical 
and trabecular parameters (p < .05). This was most evident in the OVX-MetEx 
group where several indices were at sham level or superior to OVX-Ctr (p < .05). 
The OVX-MetEx group also exhibited an enhanced toughening effect compared to the 
other OVX groups (p < .05). The beneficial skeletal effects seemed to be 
mediated by inhibition of bone resorption and stimulation of bone formation. The 
training response (i.e. jumping height) was also greater in the metformin 
treated rats compared to OVX-Ex (p < .01), indicating a performance-enhancing 
effect of metformin. Both exercise groups displayed higher lean mass than 
OVX-Ctr (p < .05). In conclusion, the combination of plyometric exercise and 
metformin improved trabecular microarchitecture and bone material properties 
relative to OVX controls. However, no additive effect of the combined 
intervention was observed compared to exercise alone.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.115193
PMID: 31857252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
state that they have no conflicts of interest
