1. Cell J. 2020 Oct;22(3):263-272. doi: 10.22074/cellj.2020.6798. Epub 2019 Dec
15.

The Combination of Metformin and Disulfiram-Cu for Effective Radiosensitization 
on Glioblastoma Cells.

Rezaei N(1)(2), Neshasteh-Riz A(1)(3), Mazaheri Z(4), Koosha F(1)(5), Hoormand 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Radiation Biology Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Radiation Sciences, School of Paramedicine, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Radiation Sciences, School of Paramedicine, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic Address: neshastehriz@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Anatomical Sciences, Medical Sciences Faculty, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the devastating types of primary brain 
tumors with a negligible response to standard therapy. Repurposing drugs, such 
as disulfiram (DSF) and metformin (Met) have shown antitumor properties in 
different cell lines, including GBM. In the present study, we focused on the 
combinatory effect of Met and DSF-Cu on the induction of apoptosis in U87-MG 
cells exposed to 6-MV X-ray beams.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, the MTT assay was performed 
to evaluate the cytotoxicity of each drug, along with the combinatory use of 
both. After irradiation, the apoptotic cells were assessed using the flow 
cytometry, western blot, and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to 
analyze the expression of some cell death markers such as BAX and BCL-2.
RESULTS: The synergistic application of both Met and DSF had cytotoxic impacts 
on the U87-MG cell line and made them sensitized to irradiation. The combinatory 
usage of both drugs significantly decreased the cells growth, induced apoptosis, 
and caused the upregulation of BAX, P53, CASPASE-3, and it also markedly 
downregulated the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2 at the gene and 
protein levels.
CONCLUSION: It seems that the synergistic application of both Met and DSF with 
the support of irradiation can remarkably restrict the growth of the U87-MG cell 
line. This may trigger apoptosis via the stimulation of the intrinsic pathway. 
The combinatory use of Met and DSF in the presence of irradiation could be 
applied for patients afflicted with GBM.

Copyright© by Royan Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.22074/cellj.2020.6798
PMCID: PMC6947006
PMID: 31863651

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest in this study.
