1. J Diabetes Investig. 2020 Jul;11(4):917-922. doi: 10.1111/jdi.13200. Epub 2020
 Jan 24.

Relationship between metformin use and vitamin B(12) status in patients with 
type 2 diabetes in Japan.

Sugawara K(1), Okada Y(1), Hirota Y(1), Sakaguchi K(2), Ogawa W(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

AIMS/INTRODUCTION: Metformin therapy has been associated with vitamin B12 (VB12) 
deficiency, but information regarding this adverse effect in Asian populations 
is limited. We have now examined the relationship between metformin use and VB12 
status in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Japan.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study was carried out with type 2 
diabetes mellitus patients treated (Met group, n = 122) or not treated (control 
group, n = 63) with metformin. The primary end-point was the difference in the 
serum concentration of homocysteine, a marker of VB12 activity, between the two 
groups. The serum concentrations of VB12, blood hemoglobin level and mean 
corpuscular volume were also compared between the groups. Subset analysis was 
carried out with individuals aged ≥70 years. The potential correlation between 
the daily dose or duration of metformin treatment and the other measured 
parameters was also examined.
RESULTS: The level of homocysteine, as well as the VB12 level, hemoglobin 
concentration and mean corpuscular volume, did not differ significantly between 
the control and treated with metformin groups. The level of homocysteine was 
positively and that of VB12 negatively correlated with the daily dose of 
metformin. Among elderly individuals, the hemoglobin level was significantly 
lower in the treated with metformin group than in the control group, although 
the mean corpuscular volume was similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of VB12 deficiency during metformin treatment appears to 
be low in Japanese type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. However, high doses of 
metformin might result in a moderate decrease in the circulating VB12 level, as 
well as in anemia in elderly individuals.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.13200
PMCID: PMC7378433
PMID: 31868971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YH has received lecture fees from Takeda 
Pharmaceutical. K Sakaguchi has received lecture fees from Astellas Pharma Inc. 
WO has received research support from Astellas, Dainippon‐Sumitomo Pharma, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis and Takeda Pharmaceutical, as well as lecture fees from 
Astellas, Dainippon‐Sumitomo Pharma, Novartis and Takeda Pharmaceutical. All 
other authors declare no conflict of interest.
