1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Mar 5;523(2):423-428. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.12.074. Epub 2019 Dec 23.

Metformin reduces prion infection in neuronal cells by enhancing autophagy.

Abdelaziz DH(1), Thapa S(2), Abdulrahman B(1), Vankuppeveld L(3), Schatzl HM(4).

Author information:
(1)Calgary Prion Research Unit, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; 
Hotchkiss Brain Institute (HBI), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of Comparative Biology & 
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(2)Calgary Prion Research Unit, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; 
Hotchkiss Brain Institute (HBI), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada; Department of Comparative Biology & Experimental Medicine, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Calgary Prion Research Unit, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; 
Department of Comparative Biology & Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Calgary Prion Research Unit, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; 
Hotchkiss Brain Institute (HBI), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada; Department of Comparative Biology & Experimental Medicine, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: 
hschaetz@ucalgary.ca.

Prion diseases are fatal infectious neurodegenerative disorders in human and 
animals that are caused by misfolding of the cellular prion protein (PrPC) into 
the infectious isoform PrPSc. No effective treatment is available for prion 
diseases. Metformin is a first-line medication for treatment of type 2 diabetes 
which is known to activate AMPK and induce autophagy through the inhibition of 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR1) signaling. Metformin was reported to be 
beneficial in various protein misfolding and neurodegenerative diseases like 
Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases. In this study we investigated the 
anti-prion effect of metformin in persistently prion-infected neuronal cells. 
Our data showed that metformin significantly decreased the PrPSc load in the 
treated cells, as shown by less PK resistant PrP in Western blots and reduced 
prion conversion activity in Real-Time Quaking-Induced Conversion (RT-QuIC) 
assay in both 22L-ScN2a and RML-ScCAD5 cells. Additionally, metformin induced 
autophagy as shown by higher levels of LC3-II in treated cells compared with 
control cells. On the other hand, our mouse bioassay showed that oral metformin 
at a dose of 2 mg/ml in drinking water had no effect on the survival of 
prion-infected mice. In conclusion, our findings describe the anti-prion effect 
of metformin in two persistently prion-infected neuronal cell lines. This effect 
can be explained at least partially by the autophagy inducing activity of 
metformin. This study sheds light on metformin as an anti-prion candidate for 
the combination therapy of prion diseases.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.12.074
PMID: 31874705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There are no 
financial interests to be disclosed.
