1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Feb 1;318(2):E237-E248. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00162.2019. Epub 2019 Dec 24.

The insulin-sensitizing mechanism of myo-inositol is associated with AMPK 
activation and GLUT-4 expression in human endometrial cells exposed to a PCOS 
environment.

Cabrera-Cruz H(1)(2), Oróstica L(1)(3), Plaza-Parrochia F(1), Torres-Pinto I(1), 
Romero C(1)(4), Vega M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Reproductive Biology, Clinical Hospital, 
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Bioanalysis and Immunology, Faculty of Sciences, National 
Autonomous University of Honduras, Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Diego 
Portales, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinical Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrine-metabolic disorder 
characterized by hyperandrogenism and ovulatory dysfunction but also obesity and 
hyperinsulinemia. These characteristics induce an insulin-resistant state in 
tissues such as the endometrium, affecting its reproductive functions. 
Myo-inositol (MYO) is an insulin-sensitizing compound used in PCOS patients; 
however, its insulin-sensitizing mechanism is unclear. To understand the 
relationship of MYO with insulin action in endometrial cells, 
sodium/myo-inositol transporter 1 (SMIT-1) (MYO-transporter), and MYO effects on 
protein levels related to the insulin pathway were evaluated. SMIT-1 was 
assessed in endometrial tissue from women with normal weight, obesity, insulin 
resistance, and PCOS; additionally, using an in vitro model of human endometrial 
cells exposed to an environment resembling hyperinsulinemic-obese-PCOS, MYO 
effect was evaluated on p-AMPK and GLUT-4 levels and glucose uptake by Western 
blot, immunocytochemistry, and confocal microscopy, respectively. SMIT-1 was 
detected in endometrial tissue from all groups and decreased in PCOS and obesity 
(P < 0.05 vs. normal weight). In the in vitro model, PCOS conditions decreased 
p-AMPK levels, while they were restored with MYO (P < 0.05). The diminished 
GLUT-4 protein levels promoted by PCOS environment were restored by MYO through 
SMIT-1 and p-AMPK-dependent mechanism (P < 0.05). Also, MYO restored glucose 
uptake in cells under PCOS condition through a p-AMPK-dependent mechanism. 
Finally, these results were similar to those obtained with metformin treatment 
in the same in vitro conditions. Consequently, MYO could be a potential insulin 
sensitizer through its positive effects on insulin-resistant tissues as 
PCOS-endometrium, acting through SMIT-1, provoking AMPK activation and elevated 
GLUT-4 levels and, consequently, increase glucose uptake by human endometrial 
cells. Therefore, MYO may be used as an effective treatment option in 
insulin-resistant PCOS women.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00162.2019
PMID: 31874063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
