1. Acta Trop. 2020 Mar;203:105312. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105312. Epub 
2019 Dec 20.

In vitro anti-echinococcal activity of octreotide: Additive effect of metformin 
linked to autophagy.

Loos JA(1), Negro P(2), Cumino AC(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Zoonosis Parasitarias, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMdP), 
Funes 3350, Nivel Cero, Mar del Plata 7600, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina.
(2)Parasitología y Enfermedades Parasitarias, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, 
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina, Boulevard Ovidio Lagos 
1000, 2170Casilda, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(3)Laboratorio de Zoonosis Parasitarias, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMdP), 
Funes 3350, Nivel Cero, Mar del Plata 7600, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; Departamento de 
Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar 
del Plata (UNMdP), Funes 3350, Nivel 2,7600Mar del Plata, Argentina. Electronic 
address: acumino@gmail.com.

Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is a worldwide zoonosis caused by the Echinococcus 
granulosus larval stage. The currently available therapy for this disease is 
based on benzimidazoles, which are rarely curative and cause several adverse 
effects. Therefore, new treatment options are needed. Octreotide (Oct) is a 
somatostatin analogue which exhibits anti-proliferative and anti-secretory 
effects over several cancer cell lines expressing somatostatin receptors. Here, 
we assessed the in vitro pharmacological effect of Oct against the E. granulosus 
larval stage. The drug caused a significant dose-dependent decrease in the 
viability of both protoscoleces and metacestodes. SEM and TEM analysis showed 
ultrastructural damage in both larval forms under drug treatment. Based on this, 
we investigated the possible presence of an Oct binding receptor in the 
parasite. The putative somatostatin/allatostatin-like receptor (Eg-s/ast) 
conserves the characteristic topology and signature sequences of the prototype 
somatostatin receptor common to vertebrates and is expressed in both 
metacestodes and protoscoleces. Moreover, Oct treated-parasites showed the 
presence of autophagic structures and a significant increase in transcriptional 
expression of autophagy key genes such as Eg-atg6, Eg-atg8, Eg-atg12 and 
Eg-atg16. In addition, by in toto immunolocalization assays, an increase in the 
punctate pattern and Eg-Atg8 protein expression was detected in Oct-treated 
metacestodes. Subsequently, the combination of Oct and Met had an additive 
effect on the viability of both larval forms. Our results provide additional 
evidence for the participation of PI3K/AKT/TOR/autophagy pathway in the 
Echinococcus survival and suggest the concomitant use of these drugs as 
potential therapeutic agents in treating of CE.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105312
PMID: 31870710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
