1. Transl Oncol. 2020 Feb;13(2):383-392. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2019.10.011. Epub 
2019 Dec 30.

Metformin Treatment for Diabetes Mellitus Correlates with Progression and 
Survival in Colorectal Carcinoma.

Powell MK(1), Cempirkova D(2), Dundr P(3), Grimmichova T(4), Trebicky F(5), E 
Brown R(6), Gregorova J(7), Litschmannova M(8), Janurova K(9), Pesta M(10), 
Heneberg P(11).

Author information:
(1)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic; 
Department of Pathology, Hospital Jablonec Nad Nisou, Jablonec Nad Nisou, Czech 
Republic; Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky 
University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. Electronic address: mp1348@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital Jindrichuv Hradec, Jindrichuv Hradec, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Institute of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic; 
Medicine Department, University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, Czech 
Republic; Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Radiation Oncology, Na Bulovce Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Morphoproteomic Laboratory, UT Health McGovern Medical School, Houston, 
Texas, USA.
(7)Clinical Pharmacy Department, Na Bulovce Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(8)Department of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, VSB - Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech 
Republic.
(9)IT4Innovations, VSB - Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech 
Republic.
(10)Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Department of 
Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is unfavorably associated with cancer risk. The 
purpose of this multidisciplinary project was to evaluate a possible association 
of diabetes mellitus and other comorbidities and their treatment with 
progression of colorectal cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated the correlation between pathological 
characteristics and clinical course, including comorbidities in 1004 Czech 
patients diagnosed and surgically treated for colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC) 
between 1999 and 2016.
RESULTS: In our data set, CRC patients treated with metformin due to coexisting 
diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2DM) developed fewer distant metastases which 
clinically correlates with slower CRC progression. Survival in metformin 
subgroup was longer, particularly in men with CRC. Osteoporosis may be a 
negative factor of survival in CRC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings also indicate that aging, higher tumor grade and TNM 
stage, coexistence of selected endocrine disorders, and metabolic abnormalities 
may change the tumor microenvironment and impact survival in colorectal cancer, 
although mechanism of these observations yet to be explained. Patients with 
diabetes mellitus type 2 treated with metformin may represent the altered 
microenvironment with specifically tuned metabolic molecular responses and with 
various epigenetic characteristics. More awareness and increased understanding 
of the mechanisms underlying the positive effect of metformin on patients' 
survival could offer insight into new treatment methods and permit more 
individualized treatment plans.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2019.10.011
PMCID: PMC6940647
PMID: 31896527
