1. Anticancer Res. 2020 Jan;40(1):121-132. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.13933.

Metformin Inhibits Proliferation and Tumor Growth of QGP-1 Pancreatic 
Neuroendocrine Tumor Cells by Inducing Cell Cycle Arrest and Apoptosis.

Yamana H(1), Kato K(1), Kobara H(1), Fujihara S(1), Fujita K(1), Namima D(1), 
Fujita N(1), Kobayashi K(1), Kamada H(1), Morishita A(1), Tsutsui K(1), Iwama 
H(2), Masaki T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University, Kagawa, 
Japan.
(2)Life Science Research Center, Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University, Kagawa, 
Japan tmasaki@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs) are rare pancreatic 
neoplasms, and therapeutic options for pNETs are limited. Metformin is an 
anti-hypoglycemic drug that appears to have anticancer effects. However, little 
is known about the effect of metformin on pNETs. In this study, we investigated 
the anti-proliferative effect of metformin on a human pNET cell line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-proliferative properties of metformin were 
evaluated in QGP-1 and NCI-H727 cells using a cell counting kit-8 assay. 
Xenograft mouse models were used to assess the tumor effect in vivo.
RESULTS: Metformin inhibited the proliferation and anti-tumor growth of QGP-1 
cells, accompanied by their arrest during the cell cycle at the G0/G1 phase. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissues revealed down-regulation of cyclin 
D1 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen in the metformin-treated group. 
Additionally, metformin induced apoptosis, and the expression of survivin and 
claspin were decreased in metformin-treated QGP-1 cells according to the 
apoptosis array. Furthermore, the angiogenic related protein TIMP-1 was 
down-regulated, and its miRNA expression was altered by metformin in QGP-1 
cells.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our study demonstrated the therapeutic potential of 
metformin and provides molecular mechanistic insights into its anti-tumoral 
effect on pNETs. This study is the first one describing anti-tumoral effects in 
pNETs.

Copyright© 2020, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.13933
PMID: 31892560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
