1. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2020 Jan;46(1):146-158. doi:
10.1080/03639045.2019.1711387.

Assessment of the effect of polymers combination and effervescent component on 
the drug release of swellable gastro-floating tablet formulation through 
compartmental modeling-based approach.

Choiri S(1), Sulaiman TNS(2), Rohman A(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Technology and Drug Delivery, Department of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Sebelas Maret, Surakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 
Indonesia.

The aim of this research was to assess the effect of polymer blend and 
effervescent components on the floating and swelling behaviors of swellable 
gastro-floating formulation as well as the drug release through a compartmental 
modeling analysis. Swellable gastro-floating formulation of freely water-soluble 
drug, metformin HCl as a drug model, was formulated and developed using 
D-optimal design. Polymer combination between interpolymer complex (IPC) 
(poly-vinyl acetate-copolymer methacrylate) and hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose 
(HPMC), and effervescent components were studied and optimized in this work. 
Several factors affecting the drug release behavior were determined e.g. 
swelling behavior, erosion behavior, and floating behavior were studied as well 
as the drug release through compartmental modeling analysis. The results 
revealed that the hydrophilic polymer was responsible for gas entrapment formed 
from effervescent reaction, meanwhile IPC contributed on maintaining the swollen 
matrix integrity through intermolecular polymer interaction. In addition, 
effervescent components played fundamental role in the formation of porous 
system as well as inducing burst release effect. Compartmental modeling provided 
different outlook about the drug release. Presence of IPC at a high proportion 
(10-15%) of the polymer blend modulated the changes of pattern of the drug 
release kinetics and mechanism. Finally, compartmental modeling-based approach 
was more adequate to describe the drug release kinetics and mechanism compared 
to the monophasic equation model correlating with process understanding of the 
drug release from swellable gastro-floating formulation.

DOI: 10.1080/03639045.2019.1711387
PMID: 31894720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
