1. Pharmacol Res. 2020 Feb;152:104626. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2019.104626. Epub 2020
 Jan 2.

Therapeutic potential of polyphenols in cardiovascular diseases: Regulation of 
mTOR signaling pathway.

Sanches-Silva A(1), Testai L(2), Nabavi SF(3), Battino M(4), Pandima Devi K(5), 
Tejada S(6), Sureda A(7), Xu S(8), Yousefi B(9), Majidinia M(10), Russo GL(11), 
Efferth T(12), Nabavi SM(13), Farzaei MH(14).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Agricultural and Veterinary Research (INIAV), Vairão, 
Vila do Conde, Portugal; Center for Study in Animal Science (CECA), ICETA, 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, via Bonanno 6 - 56126, Pisa, 
Italy.
(3)Applied Biotechnology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Polytechnic University 
of Marche, Ancona, Italy; Nutrition and Food Science Group, Department of 
Analytical and Food Chemistry, CITACA, CACTI, University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain; 
International Research Center for Food Nutrition and Safety, Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, China.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Alagappa University (Science Campus), Karaikudi 
630 003, Tamil Nadu, India.
(6)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Department of Biology, Institut d'Investigació 
Sanitària Illes Balears (IdISBa) and CIBEROBN (Physiopathology of Obesity and 
Nutrition), University of Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, E-07122, Balearic 
Islands, Spain.
(7)Research Group on Community Nutrition and Oxidative Stress (NUCOX), Institut 
d'Investigació Sanitària Illes Balears (IdISBa) and CIBEROBN (Physiopathology of 
Obesity and Nutrition), University of Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, 
E-07122, Balearic Islands, Spain.
(8)University of Rochester, Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rochester, 
NY, 14623, USA.
(9)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(10)Solid Tumor Research Center, Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia, 
Iran.
(11)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, 83100 Avellino, 
Italy.
(12)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical 
Sciences, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(13)Applied Biotechnology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: Nabavi208@gmail.com.
(14)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research center, Health Institute, Kermanshah 
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.

Cardiovascular diseases comprise of non-communicable disorders that involve the 
heart and/or blood vessels and have become the leading cause of death worldwide 
with increased prevalence by age. mTOR is a serine/threonine-specific protein 
kinase which plays a central role in many physiological processes including 
cardiovascular diseases, and also integrates various proliferative signals, 
nutrient and energy abundance and stressful situations. mTOR also acts as 
central regulator during chronic stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and 
deregulated autophagy which are associated with senescence. Under oxidative 
stress, mTOR has been reported to exert protective effects regulating apoptosis 
and autophagy processes and favoring tissue repair. On the other hand, 
inhibition of mTOR has been suggested to have beneficial effects against 
atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure, and also in extending 
the lifespan. In this aspect, the use of drugs or natural compounds, which can 
target mTOR is an interesting approach in order to reduce the number of deaths 
caused by cardiovascular disease. In the present review, we intend to shed light 
on the possible effects and molecular mechanism of natural agents like 
polyphenols via regulating mTOR.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2019.104626
PMID: 31904507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing Interest Authors 
declare no conflict of interest.
