1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Jun 1;59(6):1426-1438. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kez631.

Metformin enhances the immunomodulatory potential of adipose-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells through STAT1 in an animal model of lupus.

Jang SG(1)(2), Lee J(1), Hong SM(1), Kwok SK(1)(3), Cho ML(1), Park SH(1)(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic Research Institute of Medical 
ScienceThe Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedicine & Health Sciences, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are considered potential therapeutic 
agents for treating autoimmune disease because of their immunomodulatory 
capacities and anti-inflammatory effects. However, several studies have shown 
that there is no consistency in the effectiveness of the MSCs to treat 
autoimmune disease, including SLE. In this study, we investigated whether 
metformin could enhance the immunoregulatory function of MSCs, what mechanism is 
relevant, and whether metformin-treated MSCs could be effective in an animal 
lupus model.
METHODS: Adipose-derived (Ad)-MSCs were cultured for 72 h in the presence of 
metformin. Immunoregulatory factors expression was analysed by real-time PCR and 
ELISA. MRL/lpr mice weekly injected intravenously with 1 × 106 Ad-MSCs or 
metformin-treated Ad-MSCs for 8 weeks. 16-week-old mice were sacrificed and 
proteinuria, anti-dsDNA IgG antibody, glomerulonephritis, immune complex, 
cellular subset were analysed in each group.
RESULTS: Metformin enhanced the immunomodulatory functions of Ad-MSCs including 
IDO, IL-10 and TGF-β. Metformin upregulated the expression of p-AMPK, p-STAT1 
and inhibited the expression of p-STAT3, p-mTOR in Ad-MSCs. STAT1 inhibition by 
siRNA strongly diminished IDO, IL-10, TGF-β in metformin-treated Ad-MSCs. As a 
result, metformin promoted the immunoregulatory effect of Ad-MSCs by enhancing 
STAT1 expression, which was dependent on the AMPK/mTOR pathway. Administration 
of metformin-treated Ad-MSCs resulted in significant disease activity 
improvement including inflammatory phenotype, glomerulonephritis, proteinuria 
and anti-dsDNA IgG antibody production in MRL/lpr mice. Moreover, 
metformin-treated Ad-MSCs inhibited CD4-CD8- T-cell expansion and Th17/Treg cell 
ratio.
CONCLUSION: Metformin optimized the immunoregulatory properties of Ad-MSCs and 
may be a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of lupus.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez631
PMID: 31904843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
