1. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2020 Oct;45(5):937-945. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.13105. Epub 2020 
Jan 5.

The impact of oral hormonal contraception on metformin action on 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis activity in women with diabetes and 
prediabetes: A pilot study.

Krysiak R(1), Kowalcze K(2), Wolnowska M(3), Okopień B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(2)Department of Paediatrics in Bytom, School of Health Sciences in Katowice, 
Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Municipal Integrated Hospital in Częstochowa, 
Częstochowa, Poland.

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: The impact of metformin on thyrotropin levels is 
sex-dependent. No previous study has assessed whether sex steroids determine 
metformin action on thyrotrope and thyroid cell functioning. The aim of the 
present study was to compare the effect of this agent on 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis activity and thyroid function tests between 
women receiving oral contraceptive pills and women not using any contraception.
METHODS: The study population included 52 women with subclinical hypothyroidism 
and prediabetes or diabetes, 20 of whom had been using oral contraceptive pills 
for at least 12 months before the beginning of the study. Over the entire study 
period (4 months), all participants received oral metformin (1.7-3 g daily). 
Circulating levels of glucose, insulin, thyrotropin, free thyroid hormones, 
oestradiol, gonadotropins and prolactin were measured, while the structure 
parameters of thyroid homeostasis and the degree of insulin sensitivity were 
calculated at the beginning and at the end of the study.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The study groups differed in oestradiol, gonadotropins 
and prolactin levels and in structure parameter inference approach (SPINA)-GT. 
In both groups, metformin reduced glucose levels, homeostasis model assessment 1 
of insulin resistance index (HOMA1-IR), thyrotropin levels and Jostel's 
thyrotropin index, as well as increased SPINA-GT. In women receiving oral 
contraceptive pills, the drug slightly decreased serum prolactin levels. The 
impact on metformin on HOMA1-IR, thyrotropin, prolactin, Jostel's thyrotropin 
index and SPINA-GT was more pronounced if women received oral contraception, as 
well as more pronounced in patients treated with higher doses of this agent. 
Treatment-induced changes in thyrotropin and Jostel's thyrotropin index 
correlated with their baseline values, baseline levels of oestradiol and 
gonadotropins, as well as with the degree of a reduction in HOMA1-IR.
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: This study is the first one to have shown that oral 
oestrogens potentiate the effect of metformin on hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid 
axis activity.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpt.13105
PMID: 31903641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
