1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2020 Feb;160:107998. doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2020.107998. Epub 2020 Jan 3.

Pharmacological intervention for diabetes after pregnancy prevention in women 
with prior gestational diabetes: A scoping review.

Pancer J(1), Wu N(1), Mahmoud I(2), Dasgupta K(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Outcomes Research and Evaluation (CORE), Research Institute of the 
McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Department of 
Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Medical Library, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Divisions of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology & Metabolism, and Epidemiology, 
Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada; Centre for Outcomes Research and Evaluation (CORE), Research Institute 
of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Department of 
Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada. Electronic 
address: kaberi.dasgupta@mcgill.ca.

Women with previous gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are at increased risk of 
developing diabetes after pregnancy (DAP), especially 5-10 years postpartum. Two 
well-known diabetes prevention trials demonstrated a significant reduction in 
DAP incidence using metformin and troglitazone; however, since their 
publication, several novel classes of anti-hyperglycemic agents have emerged. 
This review aimed to conduct a systematic literature search for new evidence in 
support of pharmacotherapy in DAP prevention and to analyze the results based on 
special considerations for women of reproductive potential. The only studies 
whose primary outcome was DAP incidence were those examining metformin, the 
thiazolidinediones troglitazone and pioglitazone, and the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 
inhibitor vildagliptin. Metformin was effective in DAP reduction and was well 
tolerated, but participants were on average 12 years beyond their GDM pregnancy. 
Troglitazone was also shown to prevent DAP, but was withdrawn from the market 
due to hepatotoxicity. There was no comparator arm in the pioglitazone study, 
which limits its interpretability. The vildagliptin study was underpowered. 
There are ongoing trials with glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 
sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, but none with diabetes incidence as a 
primary outcome. This review highlights the limited evidence base for 
pharmacological prevention of DAP.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2020.107998
PMID: 31911249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.
