1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2020 Mar;123:109776. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109776. 
Epub 2020 Jan 3.

Combined effects of metformin and photobiomodulation improve the proliferation 
phase of wound healing in type 2 diabetic rats.

Bagheri M(1), Mostafavinia A(2), Abdollahifar MA(3), Amini A(4), Ghoreishi 
SK(5), Chien S(6), Hamblin MR(7), Bayat S(8), Bayat M(9).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran. Electronic address: majnoon.bagheri@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic 
Azad University, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: a.mostafavinia@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
abdollahima@sbmu.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
dr.amini@sbmu.ac.ir.
(5)Department of Statistics, University of Qom, Qom, Iran. Electronic address: 
atty_ghoreishi@yahoo.com.
(6)Price Institute of Surgical Research, University of Louisville, Noveratech 
LLC of Louisville, Louisville, USA. Electronic address: 
sufan.chien@louisville.edu.
(7)Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA. 
Electronic address: hamblin@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.
(8)Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Il, USA. Electronic address: 
saharnaz.bayat@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Price Institute of 
Surgical Research, University of Louisville, Noveratech LLC of Louisville, 
Louisville, USA. Electronic address: bayat_m@yahoo.com.

We determined the impact of Photobiomodulation (PBM) and metformin 
administration alone and combined on the inflammation and proliferation steps of 
wound healing of incisions in type two diabetes mellitus (T2DM) rats. 40 rats 
were divided into 4 groups (n = 10 each group). A non-genetic model of T2DM was 
induced in all rats, and an incision was made on each rat. There were 4 groups 
as follows: Group 1 was control group. Group 2 received PBM alone (890 nm, 
80 Hz, 0.324 J/cm2, daily). Group 3 received metformin alone (50 mg/kg, i.p., 
daily) and the fourth group received combination of PBM + metformin. At 
inflammation (day 4) and proliferation (day 7) steps, tensiometerical, 
stereological, and immunohistochemical examinations were performed. PBM and 
PBM + metformin treatments significantly increased wound strength at 
inflammation and proliferation steps of wound healing respectively. PBM, 
metformin, and PBM + metformin groups significantly decreased inflammatory cells 
at inflammation and proliferation steps of wound healing. PBM, metformin, and 
PBM + metformin groups significantly improved granulation tissue formation by 
increasing fibroblasts, and new blood vessel formation at inflammation and 
proliferation steps of wound healing. Metformin significantly increased M2 
macrophages than other treatment groups at inflammation and proliferation steps 
of wound healing. Simultaneously, PBM significantly decreased M2 macrophages 
than control group. We concluded PBM and PBM + metformin treatments 
significantly hastened repair at the inflammation and proliferation steps of 
repairing skin injury in a non-genetic model of T2 DM. PBM + metformin showed a 
synergistic impact. There were not a positive relation between M2 macrophage 
number and wound strength in the studied groups. The details of the molecular 
mechanisms of PBM, and PBM + metformin treatments of repairing wounds in 
animals, and treatment of DFUs of patients with T2 DM should be elucidated by 
further research.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109776
PMID: 31911295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Only MRH 
declares some potential conflicts of interest: Scientific Advisory Boards: 
Transdermal Cap Inc, Cleveland, OH; BeWell Global Inc, Wan Chai, Hong Kong.
