1. Diabetes Metab. 2020 Nov;46(6):427-441. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2019.12.007.
Epub  2020 Jan 7.

Efficacy and safety of anti-hyperglycaemic drugs in patients with non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease with or without diabetes: An updated systematic review of 
randomized controlled trials.

Mantovani A(1), Byrne CD(2), Scorletti E(3), Mantzoros CS(4), Targher G(5).

Author information:
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
University and Azienda Ospedaliera, Universitaria Integrata of Verona, Piazzale 
Stefani, 1, 37126 Verona, Italy. Electronic address: giovanni.targher@univr.it.
(2)Southampton National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research 
Centre, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, 
Southampton, UK; Nutrition and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, UK.
(3)Southampton National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research 
Centre, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, 
Southampton, UK; Nutrition and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, UK; Division of Gastroenterology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Centre, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(5)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
University and Azienda Ospedaliera, Universitaria Integrata of Verona, Piazzale 
Stefani, 1, 37126 Verona, Italy.

AIM: There are no approved drugs for the treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD). However, many randomized controlled trials (RCT) have examined 
the effect of anti-hyperglycaemic agents on NAFLD in patients with and without 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), since both T2DM and insulin resistance are 
closely linked to this burdensome liver disease.
METHODS: We systematically searched publication databases using predefined 
keywords to identify head-to-head or placebo-controlled RCTs (published until 
September 30, 2019) of NAFLD individuals testing the efficacy of 
anti-hyperglycaemic drugs to specifically treat NAFLD or non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH). Outcomes of interest included changes in serum liver 
enzyme levels, liver fat, liver fibrosis, or histologic resolution of NASH.
RESULTS: We included 29 RCTs involving a total of 2,617 individuals (∼45% had 
T2DM) that have used metformin (n=6 studies), glitazones (n=8 studies), 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (n=6 studies), dipeptidyl peptidase-4 
inhibitors (n=4 studies) or sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (n=7 
studies) to treat NAFLD. Although most anti-hyperglycaemic drugs improved serum 
liver enzyme levels, only glitazones (especially pioglitazone) and liraglutide 
showed an improvement of histologic features of NAFLD, with a mild beneficial 
effect also on liver fibrosis for pioglitazone only.
CONCLUSION: RCT evidence supports the efficacy of some anti-hyperglycaemic 
agents (especially pioglitazone) in patients with NAFLD or NASH, though weight 
gain with pioglitazone may warrant caution. Further well-designed RCTs are 
needed to better characterize the efficacy and safety of monotherapy and 
combination therapy with anti-hyperglycaemic agents in patients with NAFLD.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabet.2019.12.007
PMID: 31923578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
