1. Andrology. 2020 May;8(3):663-670. doi: 10.1111/andr.12755. Epub 2020 Jan 24.

In vitro exposure to metformin activates human spermatozoa at therapeutically 
relevant concentrations.

Yang Y(1), Chen H(2), Weng S(3), Pan T(3), Chen W(3), Wang F(3), Luo T(3), Tang 
Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(2)Reproductive Medical Center, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital, 
Nanchang, China.
(3)Institute of Life Science and School of Life Science, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, China.
(4)Reproductive Department of Urology, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China.

BACKGROUND: Metformin, a drug used to treat type 2 diabetes, has gained 
attention for its multiple therapeutic applications. However, little is known 
about its effects on human sperm function at therapeutically relevant 
concentration.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to elucidate the in vitro actions of 
metformin on human sperm function and explore the underlying mechanism of any 
effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human ejaculated spermatozoa were treated with 
therapeutically relevant concentrations (0.25, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 µM) of 
metformin in vitro. Fertilization-essential functions of spermatozoa were 
examined, including viability, motility, capacitation, acrosome reaction, 
hyperactivation, and penetration ability. The signaling pathways mediated by 
5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), intracellular calcium concentration 
([Ca2+ ]i ), and tyrosine phosphorylation of spermatozoa were also measured.
RESULTS: Although metformin did not affect sperm viability, motility, and [Ca2+ 
]i , it significantly increased the percentages of capacitated spermatozoa, 
acrosomal-reacted spermatozoa, and hyperactivated spermatozoa as well as 
penetration ability of human spermatozoa at the concentrations of 40 and 80 µM 
(P < .05). These concentrations of metformin also elevated the levels of 
phosphorylated AMPK and tyrosine phosphorylation in human spermatozoa. In 
addition, activation of AMPK by A769662 (an AMPK activator) had similar effects 
to metformin on human spermatozoa, while inhibition of AMPK by Compound C (an 
AMPK inhibitor) suppressed the enhancement of metformin on human spermatozoa.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that metformin activates human sperm function 
through an AMPK-related mechanism which increases tyrosine phosphorylation at 
therapeutically relevant concentrations, thereby suggesting its improvement on 
human sperm function when treating subfertile males of type 2 diabetes.

© 2020 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/andr.12755
PMID: 31944615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
