1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2020 Apr;1864(4):129533. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129533. Epub 2020 Jan 15.

Metformin attenuates adhesion between cancer and endothelial cells in chronic 
hyperglycemia by recovery of the endothelial glycocalyx barrier.

Targosz-Korecka M(1), Malek-Zietek KE(2), Kloska D(3), Rajfur Z(4), Stepien 
EŁ(5), Grochot-Przeczek A(6), Szymonski M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics of Nanostructures and Nanotechnology, Faculty of 
Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, 
Krakow, Poland. Electronic address: marta.targosz-korecka@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Physics of Nanostructures and Nanotechnology, Faculty of 
Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, 
Krakow, Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Department of Molecular and Interfacial Biophysics, Faculty of Physics, 
Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Department of Medical Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Applied 
Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(6)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. Electronic address: 
anna.grochot-przeczek@uj.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiologic studies suggest that diabetes is associated with an 
increased risk of cancer. Concurrently, clinical trials have shown that 
metformin, which is a first-line antidiabetic drug, displays anticancer 
activity. The underlying mechanisms for these effects are, however, still not 
well recognized.
METHODS: Methods based on atomic force microscopy (AFM) were used to directly 
evaluate the influence of metformin on the nanomechanical and adhesive 
properties of endothelial and cancer cells in chronic hyperglycemia. AFM 
single-cell force spectroscopy (SCFS) was used to measure the total adhesion 
force and the work of detachment between EA.hy926 endothelial cells and A549 
lung carcinoma cells. Nanoindentation with a spherical AFM probe provided 
information about the nanomechanical properties of cells, particularly the 
length and grafting density of the glycocalyx layer. Fluorescence imaging was 
used for glycocalyx visualization and monitoring of E-selectin and ICAM-1 
expression.
RESULTS: SCFS demonstrated that metformin attenuates adhesive interactions 
between EA.hy926 endothelial cells and A549 lung carcinoma cells in chronic 
hyperglycemia. Nanoindentation experiments, confirmed by confocal microscopy 
imaging, revealed metformin-induced recovery of endothelial glycocalyx length 
and density. The recovery of endothelial glycocalyx was correlated with a 
decrease in the surface expression of E-selectin and ICAM-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results identify metformin-induced endothelial glycocalyx 
restoration as a key factor responsible for the attenuation of adhesion between 
EA.hy926 endothelial cells and A549 lung carcinoma cells.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Metformin-induced glycocalyx restoration and the resulting 
attenuation of adhesive interactions between the endothelium and cancer cells 
may account for the antimetastatic properties of this drug.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129533
PMID: 31953127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
