1. Diabetes Ther. 2020 Mar;11(3):633-642. doi: 10.1007/s13300-020-00761-w. Epub 
2020 Jan 18.

Metformin Delays the Development of Atherosclerosis in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
via the Methylglyoxal Pathway.

Liu A(1), Li K(2), Xu L(3), Si M(4), Teng G(5), Li G(6), Xue J(7), Liang S(7), 
Song W(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatal intensive care unit, The Second Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Central Laboratory, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of pathology, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China. drsongw@163.com.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of our study was to determine the effect of metformin 
administration on juvenile type 1 diabetes mellitus and atherosclerosis in 
apolipoprotein E null (ApoE-/-) mice and to explore the mechanism involved.
METHODS: Eighteen male ApoE-/- mice were injected with streptozotocin to induce 
diabetes (diabetic group) and 18 mice who received no streptozotocin injection 
were assigned to the control (non-diabetic) group. Six mice in each group were 
then orally administered metformin, simvastatin, or vehicle, respectively, 
following which the mice were euthanized and tissue samples collected.
RESULTS: Fasting plasma glucose, low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and 
triglyceride concentrations were significantly higher in the three diabetic 
groups than in the three non-diabetic groups. Plasma N∈-(carboxymethyl)lysine 
and N∈-(carboxyethyl)lysine concentrations were higher in the diabetic mice than 
in the non-diabetic mice, but metformin treatment reduced these concentrations 
more effectively than simvastatin. All three diabetic groups demonstrated 
obvious arterial plaques, but these were largest in the vehicle-treated diabetic 
group. The expression of extracellular nitric oxide synthase was highest in the 
simvastatin-treated non-diabetic group, and in diabetic mice it was higher in 
the simvastatin-treated group than in the other two groups. No significant 
expression of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) was measured in the three 
diabetic groups, but a low level of AMPK expression was detected in the 
non-diabetic groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin can limit the development of atherosclerosis secondary to 
diabetes in young diabetic mice. A possible mechanism is the removal of 
methylglyoxal, thereby reducing the formation of advanced glycation endproducts, 
rather than by lowering the blood glucose level.
FUNDING: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (81901106) and Jinan clinical medical science and technology innovation 
plan (201907002).

DOI: 10.1007/s13300-020-00761-w
PMCID: PMC7048885
PMID: 31955370
