1. mSystems. 2020 Jan 21;5(1):e00606-19. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00606-19.

MICOM: Metagenome-Scale Modeling To Infer Metabolic Interactions in the Gut 
Microbiota.

Diener C(1)(2), Gibbons SM(3)(4), Resendis-Antonio O(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica (INMEGEN), Mexico City, México.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA 
sgibbons@isbscience.org oresendis@inmegen.gob.mx.
(4)eScience Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica (INMEGEN), Mexico City, México 
sgibbons@isbscience.org oresendis@inmegen.gob.mx.
(6)Human Systems Biology Laboratory, Coordinación de la Investigación Científica 
- Red de Apoyo a la Investigación, Universidad Nacional Autonóma de México 
(UNAM), Mexico City, México.

Compositional changes in the gut microbiota have been associated with a variety 
of medical conditions such as obesity, Crohn's disease, and diabetes. However, 
connecting microbial community composition to ecosystem function remains a 
challenge. Here, we introduce MICOM, a customizable metabolic model of the human 
gut microbiome. By using a heuristic optimization approach based on L2 
regularization, we were able to obtain a unique set of realistic growth rates 
that corresponded well with observed replication rates. We integrated adjustable 
dietary and taxon abundance constraints to generate personalized metabolic 
models for individual metagenomic samples. We applied MICOM to a balanced cohort 
of metagenomes from 186 people, including a metabolically healthy population and 
individuals with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Model results showed that 
individual bacterial genera maintained conserved niche structures across humans, 
while the community-level production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) was 
heterogeneous and highly individual specific. Model output revealed complex 
cross-feeding interactions that would be difficult to measure in vivo Metabolic 
interaction networks differed somewhat consistently between healthy and diabetic 
subjects. In particular, MICOM predicted reduced butyrate and propionate 
production in a diabetic cohort, with restoration of SCFA production profiles 
found in healthy subjects following metformin treatment. Overall, we found that 
changes in diet or taxon abundances have highly personalized effects. We believe 
MICOM can serve as a useful tool for generating mechanistic hypotheses for how 
diet and microbiome composition influence community function. All methods are 
implemented in an open-source Python package, which is available at 
https://github.com/micom-dev/micomIMPORTANCE The bacterial communities that live 
within the human gut have been linked to health and disease. However, we are 
still just beginning to understand how those bacteria interact and what 
potential interventions to our gut microbiome can make us healthier. Here, we 
present a mathematical modeling framework (named MICOM) that can recapitulate 
the growth rates of diverse bacterial species in the gut and can simulate 
metabolic interactions within microbial communities. We show that MICOM can 
unravel the ecological rules that shape the microbial landscape in our gut and 
that a given dietary or probiotic intervention can have widely different effects 
in different people.

Copyright © 2020 Diener et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00606-19
PMCID: PMC6977071
PMID: 31964767
