1. Nutrients. 2020 Jan 24;12(2):311. doi: 10.3390/nu12020311.

Acid Hydrolyzed Silk Peptide Consumption Improves Anti-Diabetic Symptoms by 
Potentiating Insulin Secretion and Preventing Gut Microbiome Dysbiosis in 
Non-Obese Type 2 Diabetic Animals.

Park S(1), Zhang T(1), Qiu JY(1), Wu X(1), Lee JY(2), Lee BY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food & Nutrition, Obesity/Diabetes Center, Hoseo University, 
Asan 31499, Korea.
(2)Worldway Co., Ltd., Sanda-gil, Jeonul-myeon, Sejong-si 30003, Korea.
(3)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, College of Biomedical Sciences, 
CHA University, Seongnam 31499, Korea.

: Silk fibroin hydrolysates have been reported to reduce hyperglycemia, but the 
mechanism has not been determined in Asian type 2 diabetes (T2DM). We 
hypothesized that the consumption of acid hydrolyzed silk peptides (SPs) 
alleviates hyperglycemia by improving insulin sensitivity and subsequently 
normalizing glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in T2DM. We investigated this 
hypothesis in a partial pancreatectomized (Px) rat model. Px rats was assigned 
randomly to the following six groups and fed assigned diet for 8 weeks: the 
Px-CON (0.5 g/kg/day dextrin), the SP-L (0.05 g/kg/day), the SP-M (0.1 
g/kg/day), the SP-H (0.5 g/kg/day), the positive-CON (30 mg/kg/day metformin), 
or the normal-CON (sham-operated rats; 0.5 g/kg/day dextrin). SPs contained high 
levels of glycine, alanine, and serine. We found SPs dose-dependently increased 
food efficiency and body weight gain in Px rats. Animals in the Px-control group 
rats exhibited lower glucose metabolism, as evidenced by impaired 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion coupled with impaired insulin sensitivity, 
and reduced bone mineral density (BMD) and lean body mass (LBM), compared to 
normal-CON. SPs and metformin similarly partially protected against Px-induced 
BMD loss in the lumbar spine and femur. Px-induced decreases in LBM were 
dose-dependently prevented by SPs, and muscle forces in the SP-M and SP-H groups 
were maintained at the normal-CON level. Glucose tolerance was dose-dependently 
improved by SPs as determined by oral glucose tolerance and oral maltose 
tolerance tests, and glucose tolerances were similar in the SP-H and 
positive-CON groups. Insulin tolerance, an index of insulin sensitivity, was 
dose-dependently enhanced by SPs, and the SP-H group exhibited better insulin 
tolerance than the positive-CON group as determined by intraperitoneal insulin 
sensitivity testing. Insulin secretory capacity assessed using a hyperglycemic 
clamp improved in the following order: Px-control <SA-L <SA-M <positive-control 
<SA-H <normal-control. SP-M prevented gut microbiota dysbiosis. In conclusion, 
SPs administered at 0.1-0.5 g/kg/day improved glucose regulation by potentiating 
both insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in non-obese T2DM rats.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12020311
PMCID: PMC7071241
PMID: 31991596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
