1. Mol Cell. 2020 Mar 5;77(5):951-969.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.028. Epub
 2020 Jan 28.

AMPK, a Regulator of Metabolism and Autophagy, Is Activated by Lysosomal Damage 
via a Novel Galectin-Directed Ubiquitin Signal Transduction System.

Jia J(1), Bissa B(1), Brecht L(2), Allers L(1), Choi SW(1), Gu Y(1), Zbinden 
M(3), Burge MR(4), Timmins G(5), Hallows K(6), Behrends C(2), Deretic V(7).

Author information:
(1)Autophagy, Inflammation and Metabolism AIM Center of Biochemical Research 
Excellence, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, 
USA; Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico 
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(2)Munich Cluster of Systems Neurology, Munich, Germany.
(3)Human Metabolome Technologies America, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Autophagy, Inflammation and Metabolism AIM Center of Biochemical Research 
Excellence, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, 
USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(5)Autophagy, Inflammation and Metabolism AIM Center of Biochemical Research 
Excellence, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, 
USA; School pf Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(6)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine and USC/UKRO 
Kidney Research Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Autophagy, Inflammation and Metabolism AIM Center of Biochemical Research 
Excellence, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, 
USA; Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico 
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA. Electronic address: 
vderetic@salud.unm.edu.

AMPK is a central regulator of metabolism and autophagy. Here we show how 
lysosomal damage activates AMPK. This occurs via a hitherto unrecognized signal 
transduction system whereby cytoplasmic sentinel lectins detect membrane damage 
leading to ubiquitination responses. Absence of Galectin 9 (Gal9) or loss of its 
capacity to recognize lumenal glycans exposed during lysosomal membrane damage 
abrogate such ubiquitination responses. Proteomic analyses with APEX2-Gal9 have 
revealed global changes within the Gal9 interactome during lysosomal damage. 
Gal9 association with lysosomal glycoproteins increases whereas interactions 
with a newly identified Gal9 partner, deubiquitinase USP9X, diminishes upon 
lysosomal injury. In response to damage, Gal9 displaces USP9X from complexes 
with TAK1 and promotes K63 ubiquitination of TAK1 thus activating AMPK on 
damaged lysosomes. This triggers autophagy and contributes to autophagic control 
of membrane-damaging microbe Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Thus, galectin and 
ubiquitin systems converge to activate AMPK and autophagy during endomembrane 
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.028
PMCID: PMC7785494
PMID: 31995728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests M.Z. was an employee of 
Human Metabolome Technologies America, Boston, MA, USA.
