1. Food Sci Nutr. 2019 Dec 9;8(1):428-444. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1327. eCollection
2020  Jan.

Antihyperglycemic effect of rice husk derived xylooligosaccharides in high-fat 
diet and low-dose streptozotocin-induced type 2 diabetic rat model.

Khat-Udomkiri N(1), Toejing P(2), Sirilun S(1), Chaiyasut C(1), Lailerd N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Innovation Center for Holistic Health, Nutraceuticals and Cosmeceuticals 
Faculty of Pharmacy Chiang Mai University Chiang Mai Thailand.
(2)Department of Physiology Faculty of Medicine Chiang Mai University Chiang Mai 
Thailand.

Rice husk (RH) is an agricultural waste obtained from rice milling process. Our 
previous study demonstrated the optimized process of extracting 
xylooligosaccharides (XOS), a prebiotic that can support the growth and activity 
of beneficial gut microbiota, from RH. Accumulated evidences indicate that the 
composition of gut microbiota is involved in the progression of insulin 
resistance and diabetes. This study aims to evaluate the antihyperglycemic 
effect and putative mechanisms of RH-XOS using a diabetic rat model induced by 
high-fat diet and streptozotocin injection. Diabetic rats were randomly assigned 
to receive vehicle (DMC), XOS (DM-XOS), metformin (DMM), and a combination of 
XOS and metformin (DMM-XOS). An additional group of rats were fed with normal 
diet plus vehicle (NDC) and normal diet plus XOS (ND-XOS). Supplementation with 
RH-XOS for 12 weeks successfully decreased the fasting plasma glucose, insulin, 
leptin, and LPS levels in DM-XOS compared with DMC. Likewise, the 
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake assessed by in vitro study was significantly 
enhanced in DM-XOS, DMM, and DMM-XOS. The diminished protein expressions of 
GLUT4 and pAktSer473 as well as pAMPKThr172 were significantly modulated in 
DM-XOS, DMM, and DMM-XOS groups. Interestingly, RH-XOS supplementation reversed 
the changed gut permeability, elevated the number of beneficial bacteria, both 
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium spp., and increased SCFAs production. Taken 
together, the results confirm the efficacy of RH-XOS in achieving good glycemic 
control in diabetes by maintenance of gut microbiota and attenuation of 
endotoxemia. The findings reveal the benefits of RH-XOS and open an opportunity 
to improve its value by its development as a nutraceutical for diabetes.

© 2019 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1327
PMCID: PMC6977422
PMID: 31993169

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that there are no known 
conflicts of interest.
