1. Life Sci. 2020 Mar 15;245:117361. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117361. Epub 2020
Jan  27.

Effect of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles on glucose homeostasis on 
type 2 diabetes experimental model.

Ali LMA(1), Shaker SA(2), Pinol R(3), Millan A(4), Hanafy MY(2), Helmy MH(2), 
Kamel MA(5), Mahmoud SA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Research Institute, University of 
Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt.; Institut des Biomolécules Max Mousseron UMR 5247 
CNRS, UM-Faculté de Pharmacie, 15 Avenue Charles Flahault, 34093 Montpellier 
cedex 05, France. Electronic address: lamiaa.ali@alexu.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Research Institute, University of 
Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt.
(3)Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Aragon-CSIC, Universidad de Zaragoza, 
Spain.
(4)Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Aragon-CSIC, Universidad de Zaragoza, 
Spain. Electronic address: amillan@unizar.es.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Research Institute, University of 
Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt.. Electronic address: maher.kamel@alexu.edu.eg.

AIMS: Evaluation of the anti-diabetic effect of superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles (SPIONs) on Type 2 diabetic rats and compared their effect to 
metformin treatment.
MAIN METHODS: Diabetic rats were treated with different doses of nanoparticles 
one time per week for 4 weeks. Fasting blood glucose level was determined for 
studied groups during the experimental period (30 days). At the end of the 
experiment, oral glucose tolerance test was carried out, serum samples were 
collected for biochemical assays. Then animals were sacrificed to obtain tissues 
for assessment of glucose transporters, insulin receptors and insulin signaling 
proteins.
KEY FINDING: SPIONs treatment normalized fasting blood glucose and lowering 
insulin level in diabetic rats compared to untreated diabetic rats. SPIONs 
significantly ameliorate the glucose sensing and the active components of 
insulin signaling pathway. The anti-diabetic effects of SPIONs may be mediated 
through its effect on (i) hepatic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma coactivator 1-alpha content, which induced by SPIONs treatment in a 
dose-dependent manner, (ii) adipocytokines as SPIONs treated diabetic rats 
showed significantly higher levels of adiponectin and lower retinol binding 
protein 4 compared to untreated diabetic rats, (iii) lipid profile as SPIONs 
treatment significantly corrected the lipid profile in a dose-dependent manner 
and to a similar extent as metformin or even better.
SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first study that explores the 
anti-diabetic effects of SPIONs on diabetic model.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117361
PMID: 32001268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There are no 
conflicts to declare.
