1. Epilepsy Behav. 2020 Mar;104(Pt A):106893. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2019.106893. 
Epub 2020 Jan 27.

Metformin and trimetazidine ameliorate diabetes-induced cognitive impediment in 
status epileptic rats.

Mohamed MAE(1), Abdel-Rahman RF(2), Mahmoud SS(2), Khattab MM(3), Safar MM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. 
Electronic address: dr.marawan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt; Department of Pharmacology, and Biochemistry, Faculty 
of Pharmacy the British University, Egypt.

Patients with diabetes and epilepsy are more prone to cognitive impairment, 
dementia, and even Alzheimer's disease. Diabetes-induced inflammatory process is 
one of the main contributing factors; however, the impact on seizure is not 
clear. The current study is aimed to examine the role of metformin and 
trimetazidine in the reduction of neuronal damage caused by inflammatory 
mediators and apoptotic factors in diabetic epileptic rodent model. Diabetic 
epileptic rats received orally either metformin (100 mg/kg) or trimetazidine 
(10 mg/kg) for 3 weeks exhibited reduced cognitive function and ameliorated the 
disturbed brain neurotransmission. Besides, they improved both the inflammatory 
status and the histopathologic alterations. Administration of metformin or 
trimetazidine ameliorated the deterioration in cognitive function in Morris 
water maze (MWM) and reduced seizure score. Furthermore, brain neurotransmitters 
glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) were reverted back to their normal 
values. Both treatments reduced the rise in inflammatory cytokines 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), apoptotic markers 
nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and caspase-3, and improved the pathological 
photomicrograph of the hippocampus of diabetic epileptic rats. Such effects were 
closely correlated to the observed increase in the adenosine triphosphate and 
adenosine diphosphate (ATP/ADP) ratio and reduction of death-associated protein 
(DAP) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). In conclusion, the current study 
shed light on the potential neuroprotective role of metformin and trimetazidine 
in the amelioration of cognitive function via hindering inflammatory processes 
in diabetic epileptic rats.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2019.106893
PMID: 32000097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest statement The 
authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or 
personal relationships that could appear to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
