1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020 Jun;22(6):904-915. doi: 10.1111/dom.13984. Epub 2020
 Feb 18.

Metformin and cardiorenal outcomes in diabetes: A reappraisal.

Petrie JR(1), Rossing PR(2)(3), Campbell IW(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(2)Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)School of Medicine, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, UK.

The guidance issued to the pharmaceutical industry by the US Food and Drug 
Administration in 2008 has led to the publication of a series of randomized, 
controlled cardiovascular outcomes trials with newer therapeutic classes of 
glucose-lowering medications. Several of these trials, which evaluated the newer 
therapeutic classes of sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors and 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, have reported a reduced incidence of 
major adverse cardiovascular and/or renal outcomes, usually relative to placebo 
and standard of care. Metformin was the first glucose-lowering agent reported to 
improve cardiovascular outcomes in the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) and 
thus became the foundation of standard care. However, as this clinical trial 
reported more than 20 years ago, differences from current standards of trial 
design and evaluation complicate comparison of the cardiovascular profiles of 
older and newer agents. Our article revisits the evidence for cardiovascular 
protection with metformin and reviews its effects on the kidney.

© 2020 The Authors. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.13984
PMCID: PMC7317924
PMID: 32009286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I.W.C. has received honoraria for work on 
advisory boards and lecturing from Johnson & Johnson, Lilly, Merck, MSD, Sanofi 
and Takeda. J.R.P. has received payment via the University of Glasgow for 
advisory and consultancy work on behalf of Novo Nordisk, Sanofi‐Aventis and for 
work on clinical trials committees on behalf of ACI Clinical (Boehringer), 
Janssen, Novo Nordisk, Quintiles (Genentech, Roche), and Sanofi‐Aventis, and has 
received travel and accommodation support from Novo Nordisk and Merck KGaA. 
J.R.P. has also received donation of services to support investigator‐led 
research from Merck KGaA, Itamar Medical (Israel) and DEXCOM, and 
investigator‐led research funding from Janssen (RISC study). J.R.P. holds no 
stock in any pharmaceutical or technology company. P.R.R. has received 
consultancy and/or speaking fees (to his institution) from AbbVie, Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Gilead, Eli 
Lilly, MSD, Merck, Mundi, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi Aventis, and has received 
research grants from AstraZeneca and Novo Nordisk.
