1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2020 Aug;223(2):246.e1-246.e10. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2020.01.054. Epub 2020 Feb 1.

Metformin use in obese mothers is associated with improved cardiovascular 
profile in the offspring.

Panagiotopoulou O(1), Syngelaki A(2), Georgiopoulos G(1), Simpson J(1), Akolekar 
R(3), Shehata H(4), Nicolaides K(2), Charakida M(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(2)Harris Birthright Research Centre for Fetal Medicine, Fetal Medicine Research 
Institute, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Fetal Medicine Unit, Medway Maritime Hospital, Gillingham, UK.
(4)Department of Maternal Medicine, Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Surrey, UK.
(5)Harris Birthright Research Centre for Fetal Medicine, Fetal Medicine Research 
Institute, King's College Hospital, London, UK; School of Biomedical Engineering 
and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Marietta.charakida@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Maternal obesity increases the risk for pregnancy complications and 
adverse neonatal outcome and has been associated with long-lasting adverse 
effects in the offspring, including increased body fat mass, insulin resistance, 
and increased risk for premature cardiovascular disease. Lifestyle interventions 
in pregnancy have produced no or modest effects in the reduction of adverse 
pregnancy outcomes in obese mothers. The Metformin in Obese Pregnant Women trial 
was associated with reduced adverse pregnancy outcomes and had no effect on 
birthweight. However, the long-term implications of metformin on the health of 
offspring remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess whether prenatal exposure to 
metformin can improve the cardiovascular profile and body composition in the 
offspring of obese mothers.
STUDY DESIGN: In 151 children from the Metformin in Obese Pregnant Women trial, 
body composition, peripheral blood pressure, and arterial pulse wave velocity 
were measured. Central hemodynamics (central blood pressure and augmentation 
index) were estimated with the use of an oscillometric device. Left ventricular 
cardiac function and structure were assessed by echocardiography.
RESULTS: Children were 3.9±1.0 years old, and 77 of them had been exposed to 
metformin prenatally. There was no significant difference in peripheral blood 
pressure, arterial stiffness, and body composition apart from gluteal and tricep 
circumferences, which were lower in the metformin group (P<.05). The metformin 
group, compared with the placebo group, had lower central hemodynamics (mean 
adjusted decrease, -0.707 mm Hg for aortic systolic blood pressure, -1.65 mm Hg 
for aortic pulse pressure, and -2.68% for augmentation index; P<.05 for all) and 
lower left ventricular diastolic function (adjusted difference in left atrial 
area, -0.525 cm2, in isovolumic relaxation time, -0.324 msec, and in pulmonary 
venous systolic wave, 2.97 cm/s; P<.05 for all). There were no significant 
differences in metabolic profile between the groups.
CONCLUSION: Children of obese mothers who were exposed prenatally to metformin, 
compared with those who were exposed to placebo, had lower central hemodynamic 
and cardiac diastolic indices. These results suggest that the administration of 
metformin in obese pregnant women potentially may have a beneficial 
cardiovascular effect for their offspring.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2020.01.054
PMID: 32017923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
