1. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2020 Jan;29(1):91-100. doi: 10.17219/acem/112612.

Non-standard AGE4 epitopes that predict polyneuropathy independently of obesity 
can be detected by slot dot-blot immunoassay.

Bronowicka-Szydełko A(1), Krzystek-Korpacka M(1), Kuzan A(1), Gostomska-Pampuch 
K(1)(2), Gacka M(3), Jakobsche-Policht U(3), Adamiec R(3), Gamian A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and 
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wrocław, Poland.
(3)Department of Angiology, Diabetes and Hypertension, Wroclaw Medical 
University, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) are formed during cascade 
reactions between reducing sugars or reactive aldehydes and proteins, lipids or 
DNA molecules. They constitute a group of various stable compounds. Advanced 
glycation end-products are considered potential biomarkers of metabolic 
disorders. However, so far only a few methods to determine the level of 
individual AGEs have been developed.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to compare the efficiency of the slot-dot 
blot method and direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in detecting 
non-standard epitopes of methylglyoxal (MGO)-modified proteins (AGE4) found in 
diabetes serum in trace amounts, and to assess AGE4 in diabetes and associated 
metabolic abnormalities.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The presence of AGE4 was detected using 2 methods: direct 
ELISA and the slot-dot blot method - a newly developed immunoassay based on 
monoclonal, commercially available antibody detection of non-standard AGE 
epitopes. AGE4 quantification, expressed as median AGE4 in arbitrary units (AU) 
and AGE4 positivity (the percent of samples with detectable AGE4) was related to 
diabetes-associated metabolic abnormalities, complications and treatment.
RESULTS: Slot-dot blot was significantly more efficient than ELISA in detecting 
non-standard AGE4 epitopes. AGE4 positivity was less frequent in patients with 
microangiopathy and in those with polyneuropathy. In patients with abnormal 
glucose metabolism, metformin treatment was associated with higher AGE4. AGE4 
positivity was significantly lower in gliptin-treated patients. Multivariate 
analysis showed that polyneuropathy and obesity were independently associated 
with AGE4 positivity, with odds ratios (ORs) of 0.21 and 3.02, respectively. 
Moreover, logistic regression showed that AGE4 positivity and HbA1c are 
independent predictors of polyneuropathy. Considering both indicators allows 
correct classification of 70.4% of cases with a general accuracy of 76%.
CONCLUSIONS: The slot dot-blot method detects compounds found in serum in trace 
amounts. Accumulation of AGE4 was associated with glucose metabolism 
abnormalities. A tendency toward AGE4 positivity was less frequent in patients 
with microangiopathy and in non-treated and gliptin-treated diabetes patients.

DOI: 10.17219/acem/112612
PMID: 32017477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
