1. Andrologia. 2020 Apr;52(3):e13528. doi: 10.1111/and.13528. Epub 2020 Feb 5.

Zingiber officinale preserves testicular structure and the expression of 
androgen receptors and proliferating cell nuclear antigen in diabetic rats.

Al-Shathly MR(1), Ali SS(2)(3), Ayuob NN(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Northern Border University, Arar, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Anatomy Department, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Yousef Abdullatif Jameel, Chair of Prophetic Medical Applications (YAJCPMA), 
Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Medical Histology and Cell Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura 
University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Delta University for Science & Technology, Mansoura, 
Egypt.

The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of Zingiber officinale, 
commonly referred to as ginger, in preserving the structural integrity of testis 
in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats compared to the efficacy of 
metformin, the traditional effective antidiabetic drug. STZ was utilised for the 
induction of diabetes mellitus in male Sprague Dawley rats. The study included 
five groups (n = 6 each), namely the normal control, ginger-treated normal, 
nontreated diabetic, metformin-treated diabetic and ginger-treated diabetic 
groups. Biochemical assessment of fasting blood glucose level (BGL) and total 
antioxidant capacity (TAC) was performed. Histopathological assessment of the 
testes was performed using routine and immunohistochemical techniques. Fasting 
BGL significantly (p = .01) reduced, whereas TAC significantly increased (p < 
.001) in metformin- and ginger-treated diabetic rats compared to those in 
untreated diabetic rats. Metformin and ginger reduced the degenerative changes 
observed in the testes of diabetic rats, significantly reduced (p < .001) 
caspase-3 immunoexpression, and significantly increased (p < .001) the 
immune-expression of androgen receptors and proliferating cell nuclear antigen. 
Ginger has antidiabetic effects and preserves testicular structural integrity 
and, thus, is recommended as an adjuvant therapy for male diabetic patients in 
the reproductive period.

© 2020 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.13528
PMID: 32020647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
