1. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2020 Apr;34(2):255-269. doi:
10.1007/s10557-020-06941-x.

The Role of AMPK Activation for Cardioprotection in Doxorubicin-Induced 
Cardiotoxicity.

Timm KN(1), Tyler DJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. kerstin.timm@dpag.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Physiology Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(3)Oxford Centre for Clinical Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.

Doxorubicin is a commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of a 
range of cancers, but despite its success in improving cancer survival rates, 
doxorubicin is cardiotoxic and can lead to congestive heart failure. Therapeutic 
options for this patient group are limited to standard heart failure medications 
with the only drug specific for doxorubicin cardiotoxicity to reach FDA approval 
being dexrazoxane, an iron-chelating agent targeting oxidative stress. However, 
dexrazoxane has failed to live up to its expectations from preclinical studies 
while also bringing up concerns about its safety. Despite decades of research, 
the molecular mechanisms of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity are still poorly 
understood and oxidative stress is no longer considered to be the sole evil. 
Mitochondrial impairment, increased apoptosis, dysregulated autophagy and 
increased fibrosis have also been shown to be crucial players in doxorubicin 
cardiotoxicity. These cellular processes are all linked by one highly conserved 
intracellular kinase: adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK). 
AMPK regulates mitochondrial biogenesis via PGC1α signalling, increases 
oxidative mitochondrial metabolism, decreases apoptosis through inhibition of 
mTOR signalling, increases autophagy through ULK1 and decreases fibrosis through 
inhibition of TGFβ signalling. AMPK therefore sits at the control point of many 
mechanisms shown to be involved in doxorubicin cardiotoxicity and cardiac AMPK 
signalling itself has been shown to be impaired by doxorubicin. In this review, 
we introduce different agents known to activate AMPK (metformin, statins, 
resveratrol, thiazolidinediones, AICAR, specific AMPK activators) as well as 
exercise and dietary restriction, and we discuss the existing evidence for their 
potential role in cardioprotection from doxorubicin cardiotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s10557-020-06941-x
PMCID: PMC7125062
PMID: 32034646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
