1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 May 10;253:112648. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112648. Epub
 2020 Feb 6.

Investigation of the antioxidant and hypoglycemiant properties of Alibertia 
edulis (L.C. Rich.) A.C. Rich. leaves.

Figueiredo de Santana Aquino D(1), Monteiro TA(2), Lima Cardoso CA(3), Heredia 
Vieira SC(3), Vieira MDC(4), de Picoli Souza K(2), Amaya-Farfan J(5), Borges 
Castro Carvalho GC(5), Moura CS(5), Morato PN(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Federal University of Grande Dourados, Dourados, 
MS, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Sciences Biological and Environmental, Federal University of 
Grande Dourados, Dourados, MS, Brazil.
(3)State University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Dourados, MS, Brazil.
(4)Faculty of Agrarian Sciences, Federal University of Grande Dourados, 
Dourados, MS, Brazil.
(5)Food & Nutrition Program, School of Food Engineering, University of Campinas, 
Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(6)State University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Dourados, MS, Brazil. Electronic 
address: di_fsa@yahoo.com.br.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Alibertia edulis (L.C. Rich.) A.C. Rich is a 
vegetable species used in Brazilian folk medicine due to it is putative 
hypoglycemiant effect but has never been pharmacologically investigated. It is 
popularly used for the control of diabetes, especially in the state of Mato 
Grosso, Brazil. Following confirmation of the antioxidant activity of A. edulis 
by Aquino et al. (2017), the aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of 
leaves of A. edulis aqueous extract (AEAE) on some biochemical parameters in 
mice fed a high-fat fed.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Leaves of A. edulis were air-dried in an oven at 40 °C for 
10 days and ground into a fine powder by mechanical milling. The AEAE was 
prepared by decoction (1:10 w/v) at 97 °C for 15 min, and later filtered and 
lyophilized. Preliminary phytochemical analysis of the AEAE has been already 
indetified the presence of caffeic acid, quercetin 
3-rhamnosyl-(1 → 6)-galactoside and iridois ioxide, ferulic acid and rutin in 
decocted leaves (Aquino et al., 2017). In one experiment, the acute oral 
toxicity AEAE was evaluated at 2,000 mg/kg of body weight. The animals were 
observed periodically for 14 days. In second experiment, the animals were 
divided into four groups (n = 5): Control, AEAE 200, AEAE 400 mg/kg and positive 
control (Metformin 100 mg/kg). In a third experiment, animals were divided into: 
Control RC (standard diet) (n = 24) and Control HFF (high-fat fed) (n = 24) 
groups for induction of glucose intolerance. After eight weeks, they were 
further subdivided into six groups (n = 8 each) RC or HFF with or without AEAE 
at doses of 200 and 400 mg/kg (2-wk) treatments to assess glucose tolerance. 
Plasma indicators of glucose tolerance and liver damage, skeletal muscle 
expression of antioxidant enzymes, and expression of the antioxidant proteins of 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and 
phosphorylated IKK were determined.
RESULTS: The HF-fed animals developed glucose intolerance which the AEAE failed 
to revert. Meanwhile, the AEAE treatment did lower the glucose levels in the 
normolipidic cohorts by virtue of its antioxidant property. It was also observed 
that the treatment with the AEAE reduced food intake negatively interfering 
weight accretion. Beyond that, the treatment with AEAE interfered in the SOD and 
catalase expression and inhibited phosphorylation of IKK thus suggesting that 
the observed hypoglycemiant power may be related to its known antioxidant 
potential. No sings of toxicity or hemolysis were detectaed at indicating that, 
at the concentrations evaluated, the extract was not toxic to normal cells.
CONCLUSION: The AEAE showed a hypoglycemiant effect in the normolipidic mice 
that received the control diet, but not in those that were made 
glucose-intolerant by consuming a high-fat fed. The extract also exhibited 
substantial protection against hemolysis and oxidative stress. Moreover, no 
signs of toxicity were evident at 2000 mg/kg of body weight.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2020.112648
PMID: 32035877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
