1. Nitric Oxide. 2020 Apr 1;97:48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2020.01.013. Epub 2020 
Feb 4.

Head-to-head comparison of inorganic nitrate and metformin in a mouse model of 
cardiometabolic disease.

Cordero-Herrera I(1), Guimarães DD(1), Moretti C(1), Zhuge Z(1), Han H(1), 
McCann Haworth S(1), Uribe Gonzalez AE(1), Andersson DC(2), Weitzberg E(3), 
Lundberg JO(4), Carlström M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Heart and Vascular Theme, Section for Heart Failure, Arrhythmia and 
GUCH, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Perioperative Medicine and Intensive Care, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: jon.lundberg@ki.se.
(5)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: mattias.carlstrom@ki.se.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Unhealthy dietary habits contribute to the increasing 
incidence of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes (T2D), which is accompanied 
by oxidative stress, compromised nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability and increased 
cardiovascular risk. Apart from lifestyle changes, biguanides such as metformin 
are the first-line pharmacological treatment for T2D. Favourable cardiometabolic 
effects have been demonstrated following dietary nitrate supplementation to 
boost the nitrate-nitrite-NO pathway. Here we aim to compare the therapeutic 
value of inorganic nitrate and metformin alone and their combination in a model 
of cardiometabolic disease.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Mice were fed control or high fat diet (HFD) for 7 weeks 
in combination with the NO synthase (NOS) inhibitor l-NAME to induce metabolic 
syndrome. Simultaneously, the mice were treated with vehicle, inorganic nitrate, 
metformin or a combination of nitrate and metformin in (drinking water). 
Cardiometabolic functions were assessed in vivo and tissues were 
collected/processed for analyses.
KEY RESULTS: HFD + L-NAME was associated with cardiometabolic dysfunction, 
compared with controls, as evident from elevated blood pressure, endothelial 
dysfunction, impaired insulin sensitivity and compromised glucose clearance as 
well as liver steatosis. Both nitrate and metformin improved insulin/glucose 
homeostasis, whereas only nitrate had favourable effects on cardiovascular 
function and steatosis. Mechanistically, metformin and nitrate improved AMPK 
signalling, whereas only nitrate attenuated oxidative stress. Combination of 
nitrate and metformin reduced HbA1c and trended to further increase AMPK 
activation.
CONCLUSION/IMPLICATIONS: Nitrate and metformin had equipotent metabolic effects, 
while nitrate was superior regarding protection against cardiovascular 
dysfunction and liver steatosis. If reproduced in future clinical trials, these 
findings may have implications for novel nutrition-based strategies against 
metabolic syndrome, T2D and associated complications.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.niox.2020.01.013
PMID: 32032718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest J.O.L and E.W. 
are co-inventors on patent applications related to the therapeutic use of 
inorganic nitrate. The other authors have no conflicts of interest.
