1. J Perinat Med. 2020 Mar 26;48(3):199-208. doi: 10.1515/jpm-2019-0402.

Drug exposure during pregnancy and fetal cardiac function - a systematic review.

Kolding L(1)(2), Eken H(2), Uldbjerg N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Background The aim of this systematic review was to describe the effects of drug 
exposure during pregnancy on fetal cardiac function. Methods We searched 
MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane and SCOPUS for studies assessing fetal cardiac 
function in drug-exposed human pregnancies. Risk of bias was assessed by the 
Risk Of Bias In Non-randomized Studies of Interventions (ROBIN-I) tool. Results 
We included 32 studies on eight different drug groups. They included 51 outcome 
variables, which were all based on ultrasound techniques primarily assessing 
systolic function: pulsed wave Doppler, tissue Doppler imaging (TDI), and B- and 
M-mode. Overall, the risk of bias was moderate. β2 agonists increased the 
systolic velocity in the ductus arteriosus and the fetal heart rate. β-blockers 
caused unchanged or decreased systolic velocity of the pulmonary trunk. 
Corticosteroids increased the velocity in the ductus arteriosus. Furthermore, in 
growth-restricted fetuses with an increased myocardial performance index (MPI') 
on the right side, corticosteroids normalized this variable. Nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), but not acetylsalicylic acid, increased the 
flow velocities in the ductus arteriosus, decreased the shortening fraction and 
increased the end-diastolic ventricular diameters. Metformin and insulin 
normalized the diastolic strain and global longitudinal strain in diabetic 
pregnancies. Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) exposure increased the 
E/A ratio on the right side, prolonged the isovolumic relaxation time (IRT) and 
ejection time, shortened the isovolumic contraction time (ICT), and decreased 
left myocardial systolic peak velocities. Chemotherapy did not cause detectable 
changes. Conclusion Six of the eight drug groups caused detectable changes in 
fetal cardiac function. However, the evidence was hampered by only a few studies 
for some drugs.

DOI: 10.1515/jpm-2019-0402
PMID: 32069248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
