1. Horm Metab Res. 2020 Feb;52(2):109-116. doi: 10.1055/a-1082-1080. Epub 2020
Feb  13.

Decreased Circulating MANF in Women with PCOS is Elevated by Metformin Therapy 
and is Inversely Correlated with Insulin Resistance and Hyperandrogenism.

Wei J(1), Wang C(1), Yang G(1), Jia Y(2), Li Y(1), Deng W(1), Long M(1), Wang 
C(1), Liu D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Laboratory of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is a novel 
neurotrophic factor. Although recent studies have suggested that MANF appeared 
to be associated with insulin resistance, the results have been inconsistent. 
The aim of our study was to determine the serum MANF levels in women with PCOS 
and controls, to investigate their relationship to insulin resistance, and to 
evaluate circulating MANF changes with metformin intervention in PCOS women. We 
conducted a series of cross-sectional and interventional studies in 90 newly 
diagnosed patients with PCOS and 60 age- and gender-matched controls. Oral 
glucose tolerance test and euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamps were performed to 
assess the glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Forty-three women with 
PCOS were randomly assigned to six months of oral metformin therapy. Serum MANF 
levels were significantly lower in women with PCOS than in controls. Serum MANF 
levels were positively correlated with M-value and negatively correlated with 
body mass index (BMI), body fat percentage (FAT), homeostatic model assessment 
of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), and free androgen index (FAI). Multivariate 
stepwise regression demonstrated that serum MANF levels were independently 
associated with M-value and FAI. After six months of metformin treatment, there 
was a significant increase in serum MANF levels in PCOS women. Serum MANF levels 
are decreased in women with PCOS, and are reversely related to insulin 
resistance and hyperandrogenism. Metformin treatment elevates serum MANF levels 
and alleviates insulin resistance and hyperandrogenism in PCOS women.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1082-1080
PMID: 32067218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
