1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2020 May;125:110000. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110000. 
Epub 2020 Feb 25.

Clinical relevance of ARF/ARL family genes and oncogenic function of ARL4C in 
endometrial cancer.

Zhang J(1), Zhang Q(2), Sun C(3), Huang Y(4), Zhang J(5), Wang Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Hospital of Zibo, Shandong, 
China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai University of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Integrated Therapy, Shanghai Cancer Center, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: crystalzhang12@163.com.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 
wangqingying@tongji.edu.cn.

Members of ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF)/ARF-like protein (ARL) family regulate 
malignant phenotype of cancer cells. The present study aims to investigate the 
clinical relevance of ARF/ARL family members in endometrial cancer. We report 
that several ARF/ARL family genes serve as prognostic biomarkers for endometrial 
cancer. Through a combination of TCGA database and immunohistochemistry 
analysis, we revealed that ARL4C, a member of ARL family, was overexpressed in 
endometrial cancer and might function as an oncogene in endometrial 
carcinogenesis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and functional studies 
demonstrated that cell cycle and cell adhesion pathways were the potential 
mechanism of ARL4C in promoting endometrial cancer cell proliferation, migration 
and invasion. Moreover, we also observed the involvement of ARL4C in 
metformin-inhibited cellular proliferation of endometrial cancer. Collectively, 
knowledge of the expression and function of ARF/ARL family genes could provide a 
potential therapeutic strategy for endometrial cancer.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110000
PMID: 32070877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding this paper.
