1. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2020 Aug;98(8):498-505. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-2019-0487. 
Epub 2020 Feb 21.

Combined treatments with metformin and phosphodiesterase inhibitors alleviate 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in high-fat diet fed rats: a comparative study.

Heeba GH(1), El-Deen RM(2), Abdel-Latif RG(1), Khalifa MMA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Minia 
University, El-Minia 61111, Egypt.
(2)Ministry of Health and Population, Undersecretary preventive sector, General 
administration viral hepatitis, Cairo, Egypt.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is an excessive accumulation of fats in 
the liver resulting in hepatic inflammation and fibrous tissue formation along 
with insulin resistance. This study was designed to investigate the possible 
protective effects of metformin alone and in combination with different 
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (PDEIs). Rats were fed a high-fat diet (HFD) for 16 
weeks to induce NAFLD. Starting from week 12, rats received metformin alone or 
in combination with pentoxifylline, cilostazol, or sildenafil. HFD 
administration resulted in hepatic steatosis and inflammation in rats. In 
addition, liver index, body composition index, activities of liver enzymes, and 
serum lipids deviated from normal. Further, significant elevations were recorded 
compared to control in terms of serum glucose, insulin, and HOMA-IR (homeostasis 
model assessment index for insulin resistance), oxidative stress parameters, 
hepatic TNF-α and NF-κB gene expression, and iNOS protein expression. Rats 
treated with metformin showed a significant improvement in the aforementioned 
parameters. However, the addition of pentoxifylline to metformin treatment 
synergized its action and produced a fortified effect against HFD-induced NAFLD 
better than other PDEIs. Data from this study indicated that combined treatment 
of metformin and pentoxifylline had the most remarkable ameliorated effects 
against HFD-induced NAFLD; further clinical investigations are needed to approve 
PDEIs for NAFLD treatment.

DOI: 10.1139/cjpp-2019-0487
PMID: 32083947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
