1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2021 Jan-Feb;39(1):21-31. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/iitbcp. Epub 2020 Feb 14.

Bioinformatics analysis of gene and microRNA targets for fibromyalgia.

Qiu Y(1), Zhang TJ(1), Meng LB(2), Cheng XT(1), Hua Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Anaesthesiology Department, Beijing Hospital, National Centre of Gerontology, 
Institute of Geriatric Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Neurology Department, Beijing Hospital, National Centre of Gerontology, 
Institute of Geriatric Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Anaesthesiology Department, Beijing Hospital, National Centre of Gerontology, 
Institute of Geriatric Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China. huazhenbj528@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: Fibromyalgia (FM) is the most common chronic pain disease in 
middle-aged women. Patients may also complain of migraine, irritable bowel 
syndrome and depression, which seriously affect their work and life, causing 
huge economic losses to society. However, the pathogenesis of FM is still 
controversial and the effect of the current treatment is far from satisfactory.
METHODS: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and miRNAs (DEMs) were found 
between FM and normal blood samples. The pathway and process enrichment analysis 
of the genes were performed. Protein-protein interaction network were 
constructed. Hub genes were found and analysed in The Comparative Toxicogenomics 
Database.
RESULTS: A total of 102 genes were up-regulated and 46 down-regulated, 206 
miRNAs down-regulated, and 15 up-regulated in FM. CD38, GATM, HDC, FOS were 
found as canditate genes. These genes were significantly associated with 
musculoskeletal disease, mental disorder, immune system disease. There was 
partial overlap between metformin therapy-related genes and FM-related genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We found DEGs and DEMs in FM patients through bioinformatics 
analysis, which may be involved in the occurrence and development of FM and 
serve as potential targets for diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/iitbcp
PMID: 32083545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
