1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2020 Jul;38(5):567-573. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3504. Epub 2020
Feb  20.

Combination of metformin and berberine represses the apoptosis of sebocytes in 
high-fat diet-induced diabetic hamsters and an insulin-treated human cell line.

Yao Y(1), Zuo J(2), Chen L(1), Wei Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, The First Clinical Medical College of Nanjing 
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Obesity and insulin resistance affect metabolic reactions, but their ensuing 
contributions to macrophage metabolism remain insufficiently understood. We 
investigated the contributions of berberine and metformin combination to the 
inhibition of sebocyte apoptosis in high-fat diet-induced diabetic hamsters and 
an insulin-treated human cell line. Golden hamsters were fed a high-glucose 
high-fat diet and administered a 6-week treatment with a combination of 
metformin and two concentrations of berberine (100 or 50 mg·kg-1 ). Body weights 
of treated hamsters were remarkably reduced compared with those of controls. 
Histological examination indicated that berberine repressed liver fat 
accumulation. Moreover, insulin and glucose concentrations were noticeably 
decreased by the combination treatments. In glucose tolerance tests, hamsters 
receiving berberine displayed higher tolerance to glucose, compared with the 
control group. Sebocytes isolated from high-fat diet-induced diabetic hamsters 
and insulin-treated human sebocytes displayed elevated cell death rates, which 
were attenuated by berberine and metformin treatments. Further studies showed 
that the effects of metformin and berberine on cellular apoptosis were mediated 
via the Bik pathway. Thus, berberine may effectively decrease circulating 
glucose levels, ameliorate insulin resistance, reduce body weight, and attenuate 
sebocyte apoptosis in diabetic hamsters, potentially decreasing vulnerability to 
the cardiovascular complications of diabetes. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY: The 
present data indicate that insulin stimulates changes in the expression levels 
of cell death-associated proteins, which participate in sebaceous gland diseases 
during obesity or diabetes. The anti-apoptotic effects of BBR and MET in 
sebaceous gland cells are regulated partially by Bik expression. To the best of 
our knowledge, this study is the first to suggest cell death counteracting 
effects of BBR in hamster and human sebocytes as well as to propose BBR as an 
innovative therapeutic agent for insulin-related sebaceous gland diseases, 
including acne.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.3504
PMID: 32080865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
