1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2020 Feb 22;22(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13075-020-2129-y.

Exploration of metformin as novel therapy for osteoarthritis: preventing 
cartilage degeneration and reducing pain behavior.

Li H(1), Ding X(1), Terkeltaub R(2)(3), Lin H(4), Zhang Y(5)(6), Zhou B(7), He 
K(7), Li K(1), Liu Z(1), Wei J(5)(6), Yang Y(8), Xie H(1)(7)(9)(10)(11), Zeng 
C(12)(13)(14), Lei G(15)(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, 
USA.
(3)VA San Diego Medical Center, San Diego, USA.
(4)Center for Cellular and Molecular Engineering, Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(6)The Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.
(7)Hunan Key Laboratory of Joint Degeneration and Injury, Changsha, China.
(8)Department of Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(9)Movement System Injury and Repair Research Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.
(10)Hunan Engineering Research Center of Osteoarthritis, Changsha, China.
(11)National Clinical Research Center of Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(12)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. zengchao@csu.edu.cn.
(13)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 
zengchao@csu.edu.cn.
(14)The Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, USA. zengchao@csu.edu.cn.
(15)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. lei_guanghua@csu.edu.cn.
(16)Hunan Key Laboratory of Joint Degeneration and Injury, Changsha, China. 
lei_guanghua@csu.edu.cn.
(17)Hunan Engineering Research Center of Osteoarthritis, Changsha, China. 
lei_guanghua@csu.edu.cn.
(18)National Clinical Research Center of Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, China. lei_guanghua@csu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Metformin could activate adenosine monophosphate-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) which was postulated as a potential therapeutic target for 
osteoarthritis. This study aimed to examine the effects of metformin on 
cartilage and pain in osteoarthritis mouse model.
METHODS: Eighty 10-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were randomized to 6 groups: 
non-operation, sham-operation, destabilization of the medial meniscus 
(DMM)-operation with intragastric saline/metformin, and DMM-operation with 
intraarticular saline/metformin. Articular cartilage degeneration was examined 
by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and graded using the scoring system 
recommended by Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI). Mechanical 
withdrawal threshold and hind paw weight distribution were measured to assess 
the pain-related behavior. Cell Counting Kit-8 assay, quantificational real-time 
polymerase chain reaction, and western blot analysis were conducted to examine 
the anabolic and anti-catabolic effect of metformin and the role of AMPK in 
mediating its effects on interleukin-1β stimulated primary mice chondrocytes.
RESULTS: Compared with mice receiving intragastric and intraarticular saline, 
mice in both intragastric and intraarticular metformin displayed attenuated 
articular cartilage degeneration, indicated by less cartilage damage under SEM 
and significantly lower OARSI scores. A higher paw withdrawal threshold and a 
decreased weight-bearing asymmetry were observed in the intragastric and 
intraarticular metformin mice compared with their corresponding saline groups in 
DMM model of osteoarthritis. In vitro experiments showed that metformin not only 
decreased the level of matrix metalloproteinase 13, but also elevated type II 
collagen production through activating AMPK pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin attenuates osteoarthritis structural worsening and 
modulates pain, suggesting its potential for osteoarthritis prevention or 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-020-2129-y
PMCID: PMC7036179
PMID: 32087740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
