1. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 21;15(2):e0229280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229280. 
eCollection 2020.

Racial/ethnic differences in circulating natriuretic peptide levels: The 
Diabetes Prevention Program.

Gupta DK(1)(2), Walford GA(3)(4)(5), Ma Y(6), Jarolim P(7)(8), Wang TJ(1)(2); 
DPP Research Group.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Translational and Clinical Cardiovascular Research Center, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States of 
America.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States of America.
(3)Diabetes Research Center (Diabetes Unit), Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of 
America.
(5)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA, United States of America.
(6)Diabetes Prevention Program Data Coordinating Center, The Biostatistics 
Center, George Washington University, Rockville, MD, United States of America.
(7)Biomarker Research Laboratory/TIMI Clinical Trial Laboratory, Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(8)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of 
America.

Natriuretic peptides are cardiac-derived hormones that enhance insulin 
sensitivity and reduce fat accumulation. Low natriuretic peptide levels are 
associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2); a condition 
with variable prevalence across racial/ethnic groups. Few studies have examined 
whether circulating natriuretic peptide levels and their response to preventive 
interventions for DM2 differ by race/ethnicity. The Diabetes Prevention Program 
(DPP) is a clinical trial (July 31, 1996- July 31, 2001) that randomized 
participants to preventive interventions for DM2. Using stored serum samples, we 
examined N-terminus pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels in 3,220 
individuals (56% white; 19% African-American; 15% Hispanic; 5% American-Indian; 
5% Asian). The influence of race/ethnicity on NT-proBNP concentrations at 
baseline and after two years of treatment with placebo, lifestyle, or metformin 
was examined with multivariable-adjusted regression. At baseline, NT-proBNP 
differed significantly by race (P < .001), with the lowest values in 
African-American individuals. Hispanic individuals also had lower baseline 
NT-proBNP levels compared with whites (P< .001), while NT-proBNP levels were 
similar between white, American-Indian, and Asian individuals. At two years of 
follow-up, NT-proBNP levels decreased in African-Americans in each of the DPP 
study arms, whereas they were stable or increased in the other racial/ethnic 
groups. In the DPP, African-American individuals had lower circulating NT-proBNP 
levels compared with individuals in other racial/ethnic groups at baseline and 
after two years of preventive interventions. Further studies should examine the 
cardio-metabolic implications of lower natriuretic peptide levels in 
African-Americans. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00004992.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229280
PMCID: PMC7034896
PMID: 32084251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Merck KGaA provides medication for DPPOS. 
DPP/DPPOS have also received donated materials from Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Parke-Davis, and LifeScan Inc. This research was also supported, in part, by the 
intramural research program of the NIDDK. LifeScan Inc., Health O Meter, Hoechst 
Marion Roussel, Inc., Merck-Medco Managed Care, Inc., Merck and Co., Nike Sports 
Marketing, Slim Fast Foods Co., and Quaker Oats Co. donated materials, 
equipment, or medicines for concomitant conditions. McKesson BioServices Corp., 
Matthews Media Group, Inc., and the Henry M. Jackson Foundation provided support 
services under subcontract with the Coordinating Center. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. There are no 
patents, products in development or marketed products to declare.
