1. J Endocrinol. 2020 May;245(2):193-205. doi: 10.1530/JOE-19-0480.

Dapagliflozin attenuates renal gluconeogenic enzyme expression in obese rats.

Swe MT(1)(2), Thongnak L(1), Jaikumkao K(3), Pongchaidecha A(1), Chatsudthipong 
V(4), Lungkaphin A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang 
Mai, Thailand.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Medicine 2, Yangon, Myanmar.
(3)Department of Radiologic Technology, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Research Center of Transport Protein for Medical Innovation, Faculty of 
Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The kidneys release glucose into the systemic circulation through glucose 
reabsorption and renal gluconeogenesis. Currently, the significance of renal 
glucose release in pathological conditions has become a subject of interest. We 
examined the effect of sodium-dependent glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor 
(SGLT2i) on renal gluconeogenic enzyme expression in obese rats. Male Wistar 
rats (180-200 g) were fed either a normal diet (ND, n = 6) or a high-fat diet. 
At 16 weeks, after confirming the degree of glucose intolerance, high-fat 
diet-fed rats were randomly subdivided into three groups (n = 6/group): 
untreated group (HF), treated with dapagliflozin 1 mg/kg/day (HFSG) and treated 
with metformin 30 mg/kg/day (HFM). The treatment was continued for 4 weeks. We 
observed that dapagliflozin or metformin mitigated the enhanced expression of 
renal gluconeogenic enzymes, PEPCK, G6Pase and FBPase, as well as improved 
glucose tolerance and renal function in obese rats. Dapagliflozin downregulated 
the elevated expression of gluconeogenic transcription factors p-GSK3β, p-CREB 
and coactivator PGC1α in the renal cortical tissue. Metformin reduced the 
expression levels of renal cortical FOXO1 and CREB. Furthermore, reduced renal 
insulin signaling was improved and renal oxidative stress was attenuated by 
either dapagliflozin or metformin treatment in obese rats. We concluded that 
glucose tolerance was improved by dapagliflozin in obese prediabetic rats by 
suppressing renal glucose release from not only glucose reabsorption but also 
renal gluconeogenesis through improving renal cortical insulin signaling and 
oxidative stress. The efficacy of dapagliflozin in improving renal insulin 
signaling, oxidative stress and renal function was greater than that of 
metformin.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-19-0480
PMID: 32092034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
