1. J Pathol. 2020 Apr;250(5):636-646. doi: 10.1002/path.5407. Epub 2020 Mar 24.

Effects of host-directed therapies on the pathology of tuberculosis.

Tsenova L(1), Singhal A(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, New York City College of Technology, 
Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(2)Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Research Centre (VIDRC), Translational Health 
Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), Faridabad, India.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis (TB), has 
co-evolved with the human immune system and utilizes multiple strategies to 
persist within infected cells, to hijack several immune mechanisms, and to cause 
severe pathology and tissue damage in the host. This delays the efficacy of 
current antibiotic therapy and contributes to the evolution of 
multi-drug-resistant strains. These challenges led to the development of the 
novel approach in TB treatment that involves therapeutic targeting of host 
immune response to control disease pathogenesis and pathogen growth, namely, 
host-directed therapies (HDTs). Such HDT approaches can (1) enhance the effect 
of antibiotics, (2) shorten treatment duration for any clinical form of TB, (3) 
promote development of immunological memory that could protect against relapse, 
and (4) ameliorate the immunopathology including matrix destruction and fibrosis 
associated with TB. In this review we discuss TB-HDT candidates shown to be of 
clinical relevance that thus could be developed to reduce pathology, tissue 
damage, and subsequent impairment of pulmonary function. © 2020 Pathological 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

© 2020 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5407
PMID: 32108337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
