1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2020 Feb 26;2020:19-0140. doi: 
10.1530/EDM-19-0140. Online ahead of print.

Acute diabetic neuropathy following improved glycaemic control: a case series 
and review.

Siddique N(1), Durcan R(1), Smyth S(2), Tun TK(1), Sreenan S(1), McDermott 
JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Diabetes and EndocrinologyConnolly Hospital Blanchardstown, 
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of NeurologyMater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

SUMMARY: We present three cases of acute diabetic neuropathy and highlight a 
potentially underappreciated link between tightening of glycaemic control and 
acute neuropathies in patients with diabetes. Case 1: A 56-year-old male with 
poorly controlled type 2 diabetes (T2DM) was commenced on basal-bolus insulin. 
He presented 6 weeks later with a diffuse painful sensory neuropathy and 
postural hypotension. He was diagnosed with treatment-induced neuropathy (TIN, 
insulin neuritis) and obtained symptomatic relief from pregabalin. Case 2: A 
67-year-old male with T2DM and chronic hyperglycaemia presented with left lower 
limb pain, weakness and weight loss shortly after achieving target glycaemia 
with oral anti-hyperglycaemics. Neurological examination and 
neuro-electrophysiological studies suggested diabetic lumbosacral 
radiculo-plexus neuropathy (DLPRN, diabetic amyotrophy). Pain and weakness 
resolved over time. Case 3: A 58-year-old male was admitted with blurred vision 
diplopia and complete ptosis of the right eye, with intact pupillary reflexes, 
shortly after intensification of glucose-lowering treatment with an SGLT2 
inhibitor as adjunct to metformin. He was diagnosed with a pupil-sparing third 
nerve palsy secondary to diabetic mononeuritis which improved over time. While 
all three acute neuropathies have been previously well described, all are rare 
and require a high index of clinical suspicion as they are essentially a 
diagnosis of exclusion. Interestingly, all three of our cases are linked by the 
development of acute neuropathy following a significant improvement in glycaemic 
control. This phenomenon is well described in TIN, but not previously 
highlighted in other acute neuropathies.
LEARNING POINTS: A link between acute tightening of glycaemic control and acute 
neuropathies has not been well described in literature. Clinicians caring for 
patients with diabetes who develop otherwise unexplained neurologic symptoms 
following a tightening of glycaemic control should consider the possibility of 
an acute diabetic neuropathy. Early recognition of these neuropathies can 
obviate the need for detailed and expensive investigations and allow for early 
institution of appropriate pain-relieving medications.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-19-0140
PMCID: PMC7077599
PMID: 32101524
