1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Jun 18;75(7):e9-e21. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glaa056.

Metformin Reduces Aging-Related Leaky Gut and Improves Cognitive Function by 
Beneficially Modulating Gut Microbiome/Goblet Cell/Mucin Axis.

Ahmadi S(1), Razazan A(1), Nagpal R(1), Jain S(2)(3), Wang B(4), Mishra SP(1), 
Wang S(1), Justice J(5), Ding J(5), McClain DA(2)(3), Kritchevsky SB(5), Kitzman 
D(5)(6), Yadav H(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine-Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(3)Mouse Metabolic Phenotyping Core, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(4)Department of Chemistry, North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine - Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Wake 
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Aging-related illnesses are increasing and effective strategies to prevent 
and/or treat them are lacking. This is because of a poor understanding of 
therapeutic targets. Low-grade inflammation is often higher in older adults and 
remains a key risk factor of aging-related morbidities and mortalities. Emerging 
evidence indicates that abnormal (dysbiotic) gut microbiome and dysfunctional 
gut permeability (leaky gut) are linked with increased inflammation in older 
adults. However, currently available drugs do not treat aging-related microbiome 
dysbiosis and leaky gut, and little is known about the cellular and molecular 
processes that can be targeted to reduce leaky gut in older adults. Here, we 
demonstrated that metformin, a safe Food and Drug Administration-approved 
antidiabetic drug, decreased leaky gut and inflammation in high-fat diet-fed 
older obese mice, by beneficially modulating the gut microbiota. In addition, 
metformin increased goblet cell mass and mucin production in the obese older 
gut, thereby decreasing leaky gut and inflammation. Mechanistically, metformin 
increased the goblet cell differentiation markers by suppressing Wnt signaling. 
Our results suggest that metformin can be used as a regimen to prevent and treat 
aging-related leaky gut and inflammation, especially in obese individuals and 
people with western-style high-fat dietary lifestyle, by beneficially modulating 
gut microbiome/goblet cell/mucin biology.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glaa056
PMCID: PMC7302182
PMID: 32129462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
