1. Reprod Sci. 2020 Sep;27(9):1742-1751. doi: 10.1007/s43032-020-00168-9. Epub
2020  Mar 2.

Potential of Auraptene in Improvement of Oocyte Maturation, Fertilization Rate, 
and Inflammation in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Mouse Model.

Abizadeh M(1), Novin MG(1), Amidi F(2), Ziaei SA(3), Abdollahifar MA(1), 
Nazarian H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. h.nazarian@sbmu.ac.ir.
(5)Men's Health and Reproductive Health Research Center, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. h.nazarian@sbmu.ac.ir.

Polycystic ovary with poor-quality oocytes has remained problematic in 
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) patients. It is well documented that the 
inflammation and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in PCOS ovaries are 
significantly higher than normal voluntaries. In this study, we hypothesized 
that auraptene (AUR), as a coumarin derivative with anti-inflammatory 
properties, may be effective in improvement of oocyte maturation and 
fertilization rate in PCOS patients. For this purpose, PCOS model was induced in 
NMRI mice and confirmed by ovarian histopathology observations and hormonal 
assays. PCOS-induced mice were administrated with AUR (PCOS-AUR) and metformin 
(PCOS-MET), and their effects on inflammation, apoptosis rate, oocyte 
maturation, and in vitro fertilization capacity were determined and compared 
with those normal and PCOS animals treated with sesame oil (PCOS-sesame oil) and 
no treatment (PCOS). Treatment with AUR and MET decreased the inflammation and 
apoptosis rates in PCOS mice compared with PCOS animals with no treatment. 
PCOS-AUR and PCOS-MET oocytes also showed higher intracellular glutathione and 
lower ROS concentrations compared with PCOS mice, indicating improved oocyte 
maturation rate. PCOS-AUR and PCOS-MET groups showed higher percentages of 
expansion rate and MII stage oocytes, and lower rate of abnormal oocytes 
compared with PCOS with no treatment. The rate of fertilization in the oocytes 
isolated from PCOS-AUR and PCOS-MET groups was higher than PCOS-sesame oil and 
PCOS groups. Our findings suggest that AUR can be considered as a potential 
candidate for improvement of oocyte maturation and fertilization capacity in 
PCOS patients, comparable to MET.

DOI: 10.1007/s43032-020-00168-9
PMID: 32124396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
