1. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2020 Mar;4:171-183. doi: 10.1200/CCI.19.00107.

Treatment Patterns for Chronic Comorbid Conditions in Patients With Cancer Using 
a Large-Scale Observational Data Network.

Chen R(1)(2)(3), Ryan P(1)(2)(4), Natarajan K(1)(2), Falconer T(1)(2), Crew 
KD(5), Reich CG(2)(6), Vashisht R(2)(7), Randhawa G(8), Shah NH(2)(7), Hripcsak 
G(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY.
(2)Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.
(4)Epidemiology Analytics, Janssen Research and Development, Titusville, NJ.
(5)Department of Medicine and the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY.
(6)IQVIA, Cambridge, MA.
(7)Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University, Palo Alto, 
CA.
(8)Health Systems and Interventions Research Branch, Healthcare Delivery 
Research Program, Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.
(9)Medical Informatics Services, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY.

PURPOSE: Patients with cancer are predisposed to developing chronic, comorbid 
conditions that affect prognosis, quality of life, and mortality. While 
treatment guidelines and care variations for these comorbidities have been 
described for the general noncancer population, less is known about real-world 
treatment patterns in patients with cancer. We sought to characterize the 
prevalence and distribution of initial treatment patterns across a large-scale 
data network for depression, hypertension, and type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) 
among patients with cancer.
METHODS: We used the Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics network, 
an international collaborative implementing the Observational Medical Outcomes 
Partnership Common Data Model to standardize more than 2 billion patient 
records. For this study, we used 8 databases across 3 countries-the United 
States, France, and Germany-with 295,529,655 patient records. We identified 
patients with cancer using SNOMED (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine) codes 
validated via manual review. We then characterized the treatment patterns of 
these patients initiating treatment of depression, hypertension, or T2DM with 
persistent treatment and at least 365 days of observation.
RESULTS: Across databases, wide variations exist in treatment patterns for 
depression (n = 1,145,510), hypertension (n = 3,178,944), and T2DM (n = 
886,766). When limited to 6-node (6-drug) sequences, we identified 61,052 unique 
sequences for depression, 346,067 sequences for hypertension, and 40,629 
sequences for T2DM. These variations persisted across sites, databases, 
countries, and conditions, with the exception of metformin (73.8%) being the 
most common initial T2DM treatment. The most common initial medications were 
sertraline (17.5%) and escitalopram (17.5%) for depression and 
hydrochlorothiazide (20.5%) and lisinopril (19.6%) for hypertension.
CONCLUSION: We identified wide variations in the treatment of common 
comorbidities in patients with cancer, similar to the general population, and 
demonstrate the feasibility of conducting research on patients with cancer 
across a large-scale observational data network using a common data model.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.19.00107
PMCID: PMC7113074
PMID: 32134687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/cci/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). PATRICK RYAN: Employment: Janssen Research & Development Stock 
and Other Ownership Interests: Johnson & Johnson NIGAM H. SHAH: Leadership: 
Prealize Health Stock and Other Ownership Interests: Apixio Consulting or 
Advisory Role: Apixio Research Funding: Google (Inst) Travel, Accommodations, 
Expenses: Apixio GEORGE HRIPCSAK: Research Funding: Janssen Research & 
Development No other potential conflicts of interest were reported.
