1. EBioMedicine. 2020 Mar;53:102697. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102697. Epub 2020 
Mar 3.

Compounds that modulate AMPK activity and hepatic steatosis impact the 
biosynthesis of microRNAs required to maintain lipid homeostasis in hepatocytes.

Latorre J(1), Ortega FJ(2), Liñares-Pose L(3), Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Lluch 
A(4), Comas F(1), Oliveras-Cañellas N(4), Ricart W(1), Höring M(5), Zhou Y(6), 
Liebisch G(5), Nidhina Haridas PA(7), Olkkonen VM(8), López M(9), Fernández-Real 
JM(10).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain; CIBER de 
la Fisiología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain; 
Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition (UDEN), Hospital of Girona 
"Dr Josep Trueta", Girona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain; CIBER de 
la Fisiología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain; 
Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition (UDEN), Hospital of Girona 
"Dr Josep Trueta", Girona, Spain. Electronic address: fortega@idibgi.org.
(3)Department of Physiology, CiMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(4)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain; 
Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition (UDEN), Hospital of Girona 
"Dr Josep Trueta", Girona, Spain.
(5)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Regensburg 
University Hospital, Regensburg, Germany.
(6)Systems Immunity Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom; Division of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of 
Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(7)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, Biomedicum 2 U, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(8)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, Biomedicum 2 U, Helsinki, 
Finland; Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Department of Physiology, CiMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic 
address: m.lopez@usc.es.
(10)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain; CIBER 
de la Fisiología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain; 
Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition (UDEN), Hospital of Girona 
"Dr Josep Trueta", Girona, Spain. Electronic address: jmfreal@idibgi.org.

BACKGROUND: While the impact of metformin in hepatocytes leads to fatty acid 
(FA) oxidation and decreased lipogenesis, hepatic microRNAs (miRNAs) have been 
associated with fat overload and impaired metabolism, contributing to the 
pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
METHODS: We investigated the expression of hundreds of miRNAs in primary 
hepatocytes challenged by compounds modulating steatosis, palmitic acid and 
compound C (as inducers), and metformin (as an inhibitor). Then, additional 
hepatocyte and rodent models were evaluated, together with transient mimic 
miRNAs transfection, lipid droplet staining, thin-layer chromatography, 
quantitative lipidomes, and mitochondrial activity, while human samples outlined 
the translational significance of this work.
FINDINGS: Our results show that treatments triggering fat accumulation and AMPK 
disruption may compromise the biosynthesis of hepatic miRNAs, while the 
knockdown of the miRNA-processing enzyme DICER in human hepatocytes exhibited 
increased lipid deposition. In this context, the ectopic recovery of miR-30b and 
miR-30c led to significant changes in genes related to FA metabolism, consistent 
reduction of ceramides, higher mitochondrial activity, and enabled β-oxidation, 
redirecting FA metabolism from energy storage to expenditure.
INTERPRETATION: Current findings unravel the biosynthesis of hepatic miR-30b and 
miR-30c in tackling inadequate FA accumulation, offering a potential avenue for 
the treatment of NAFLD.
FUNDING: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Govern de la Generalitat 
(PERIS2016), Associació Catalana de Diabetis (ACD), Sociedad Española de 
Diabetes (SED), Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER), Xunta de Galicia, 
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO), "La Caixa" Foundation, and 
CIBER de la Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN).

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102697
PMCID: PMC7056650
PMID: 32143184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We certify 
that there is no conflict of interest to disclose regarding the materials and 
data discussed in this manuscript. The contents of this manuscript have not been 
copyrighted or published previously. There are no directly related manuscripts 
or abstracts, published or unpublished, by one or more authors of this 
manuscript. The submitted manuscript nor any similar script, in whole or in 
part, will be neither copyrighted, submitted, or published elsewhere while the 
Journal is under consideration.
