1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 May;79(5):635-645. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-216713. 
Epub 2020 Mar 10.

Metformin limits osteoarthritis development and progression through activation 
of AMPK signalling.

Li J(#)(1), Zhang B(#)(2), Liu WX(2), Lu K(3), Pan H(3), Wang T(4), Oh CD(1), Yi 
D(1), Huang J(1), Zhao L(1), Ning G(2), Xing C(2), Xiao G(5), Liu-Bryan R(6), 
Feng S(7), Chen D(8)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin, China.
(3)Research Center for Human Tissues and Organs Degeneration, Shenzhen 
Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 
China.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, San Diego VA Healthcare 
System, San Diego, California, USA di.chen@siat.ac.cn ruliu@ucsd.edu 
fengsq@hotmail.com.
(7)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin, China di.chen@siat.ac.cn ruliu@ucsd.edu fengsq@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA di.chen@siat.ac.cn ruliu@ucsd.edu fengsq@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Sep;79(9):e119.

OBJECTIVES: In this study, we aim to determine the effect of metformin on 
osteoarthritis (OA) development and progression.
METHODS: Destabilisation of the medial meniscus (DMM) surgery was performed in 
10-week-old wild type and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)α1 knockout (KO) 
mice. Metformin (4 mg/day in drinking water) was given, commencing either 2 
weeks before or 2 weeks after DMM surgery. Mice were sacrificed 6 and 12 weeks 
after DMM surgery. OA phenotype was analysed by micro-computerised tomography 
(μCT), histology and pain-related behaviour tests. AMPKα1 (catalytic alpha 
subunit of AMPK) expression was examined by immunohistochemistry and 
immunofluorescence analyses. The OA phenotype was also determined by μCT and MRI 
in non-human primates.
RESULTS: Metformin upregulated phosphorylated and total AMPK expression in 
articular cartilage tissue. Mild and more severe cartilage degeneration was 
observed at 6 and 12 weeks after DMM surgery, evidenced by markedly increased 
Osteoarthritis Research Society International scores, as well as reduced 
cartilage areas. The administration of metformin, commencing either before or 
after DMM surgery, caused significant reduction in cartilage degradation. 
Prominent synovial hyperplasia and osteophyte formation were observed at both 6 
and 12 weeks after DMM surgery; these were significantly inhibited by treatment 
with metformin either before or after DMM surgery. The protective effects of 
metformin on OA development were not observed in AMPKα1 KO mice, suggesting that 
the chondroprotective effect of metformin is mediated by AMPK signalling. In 
addition, we demonstrated that treatment with metformin could also protect from 
OA progression in a partial medial meniscectomy animal model in non-human 
primates.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that metformin, administered shortly 
after joint injury, can limit OA development and progression in injury-induced 
OA animal models.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-216713
PMCID: PMC7213329
PMID: 32156705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
