1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2020 May 1;318(5):E600-E612. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00473.2019. Epub 2020 Mar 10.

Lactational metformin exposure programs offspring white adipose tissue glucose 
homeostasis and resilience to metabolic stress in a sex-dependent manner.

Carlson Z(1), Hafner H(1), Mulcahy M(2), Bullock K(3), Zhu A(1), Bridges D(2), 
Bernal-Mizrachi E(4), Gregg B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
University of Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Michigan School of Public 
Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Miami, 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.

We previously demonstrated that exposing mouse dams to metformin during 
gestation results in increased beta-cell mass at birth and increased beta-cell 
insulin secretion in adult male offspring. Given these favorable changes after a 
gestational maternal metformin exposure, we wanted to understand the long-term 
metabolic impact on offspring after exposing dams to metformin during the 
postnatal window. The newborn period provides a feasible clinical window for 
intervention and is important for beta-cell proliferation and metabolic tissue 
development. Using a C57BL/6 model, we administered metformin to dams from the 
day of birth to postnatal day 21. We monitored maternal health and offspring 
growth during the lactation window, as well as adult glucose homeostasis through 
in vivo testing. At necropsy we assessed pancreas and adipocyte morphology using 
histological and immunofluorescent staining techniques. We found that metformin 
exposure programmed male and female offspring to be leaner with a higher 
proportion of small adipocytes in the gonadal white adipose tissue (GWAT). Male, 
but not female, offspring had an improvement in glucose tolerance as young 
adults concordant with a mild increase in insulin secretion in response to 
glucose in vivo. These data demonstrate long-term metabolic programming of 
offspring associated with maternal exposure to metformin during lactation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00473.2019
PMCID: PMC7272730
PMID: 32154743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.
