1. Transplantation. 2020 Sep;104(9):e271-e280. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003216.

Metformin Preconditioning Improves Hepatobiliary Function and Reduces Injury in 
a Rat Model of Normothermic Machine Perfusion and Orthotopic Transplantation.

Westerkamp AC(1)(2)(3), Fujiyoshi M(1)(2), Ottens PJ(2), Nijsten MWN(4), Touw 
DJ(5), de Meijer VE(1)(2), Lisman T(1)(2), Leuvenink HGD(2), Moshage H(6), 
Berendsen TA(1)(2), Porte RJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Department of 
Surgery, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Critical Care, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Preconditioning of donor livers before organ retrieval may improve 
organ quality after transplantation. We investigated whether preconditioning 
with metformin reduces preservation injury and improves hepatobiliary function 
in rat donor livers during ex situ normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) and 
after orthotopic liver transplantation.
METHODS: Lewis rats were administered metformin via oral gavage, after which a 
donor hepatectomy was performed followed by a standardized cold storage period 
of 4 hours. Graft assessment was performed using NMP via double perfusion of the 
hepatic artery and portal vein. In an additional experiment, rat donor livers 
preconditioned with metformin were stored on ice for 4 hours and transplanted to 
confirm postoperative liver function and survival. Data were analyzed and 
compared with sham-fed controls.
RESULTS: Graft assessment using NMP confirmed that preconditioning significantly 
improved ATP production, markers for hepatobiliary function (total bile 
production, biliary bilirubin, and bicarbonate), and significantly lowered 
levels of lactate, glucose, and apoptosis. After orthotopic liver 
transplantation, metformin preconditioning significantly reduced transaminase 
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Preconditioning with metformin lowers hepatobiliary injury and 
improves hepatobiliary function in an in situ and ex situ model of rat donor 
liver transplantation.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003216
PMCID: PMC7439933
PMID: 32150043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no funding or conflicts of 
interest.
