1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2020 Feb 24;13:197-207. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S243154. eCollection 2020.

Biguanides Induce Acute de novo Lipogenesis in Human Primary Sebocytes.

Nicoll J(1), Buehrer BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Zen-Bio, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Acne arises during puberty, in part, due to elevated hormones and 
growth factors which stimulate de novo lipogenesis (DNL) in primary sebocytes to 
significantly increase sebum production. Oral isotretinoin is an effective acne 
therapy, reducing sebum production through inducing apoptosis in sebocytes. 
However, isotretinoin is teratogenic and has additional unwanted side effects, 
including an initial acne flare-up, which limits its utility. The biguanide, 
metformin has been found to alleviate severe acne in women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome (PCOS) through normalization of their insulin and androgen hormone 
levels. Metformin's broader effectiveness to improve acne in non-PCOS 
populations lacks significant clinical support. In an effort to determine 
whether biguanides directly affect sebogenesis, we investigated their ability to 
alter DNL in cell-based assays in vitro.
METHODS: De novo lipogenesis was measured in human primary sebocytes using 
[14C]-acetate labeling. Lipid species analysis was performed by extracting newly 
synthesized lipids and subjecting them to thin layer chromatography. Gene 
expression changes in sebocytes were identified through qPCR analysis of 
isolated RNA. Metabolic parameters including oxygen consumption rate, lactate 
production and activation of adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase 
(AMPK) were assessed in human primary sebocytes.
RESULTS: Using human primary sebocytes, we found that biguanides, isotretinoin 
and azithromycin induced an acute dose and time-dependent increase in 
[14C]-acetate labeling of neutral lipids, while AICAR, an AMPK activator, 
inhibited this DNL response. Biguanides did not activate AMPK in sebocytes, 
however, they significantly reduced oxygen consumption rate and increased 
lactate production. Treatment with biguanides, but not isotretinoin, 
significantly upregulated ACSS2 gene expression in primary sebocytes and showed 
synergism with lipogenic activators to induce DNL genes.
DISCUSSION: These changes are consistent with an acute increase in sebocyte 
lipogenesis and support the potential of biguanides to cause an initial flare-up 
in patients suffering from severe acne.

© 2020 Nicoll and Buehrer.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S243154
PMCID: PMC7048953
PMID: 32158247

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by ZenBio, Inc. and 
authors JN and BMB are employees of ZenBio. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.
