1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2020 Feb 25;10:939. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00939.  eCollection 2019.

Combination of Oligofructose and Metformin Alters the Gut Microbiota and 
Improves Metabolic Profiles, Contributing to the Potentiated Therapeutic Effects 
on Diet-Induced Obese Animals.

Li Q(1), He R(2), Zhang F(3), Zhang J(4), Lian S(5), Liu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical 
University, Yantai, China.
(2)Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Taian, China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical 
University, Binzhou, China.
(4)Second Department of Endocrinology, Taian City Central Hospital, Taian, 
China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zaozhuang Municipal Hospital, Zaozhuang, 
China.

Accumulating studies implicate that the metformin (MET)- and oligofructose 
(OFS)-altered gut microbiota may play roles in the improvement of type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity. However, whether the combined 
administration of OFS and MET could effectively affect the gut microbiota and 
improve metabolic profiles remains unknown. Here, we randomized diet-induced 
obesity (DIO) rats to OFS, MET, or MET+OFS for 8 weeks and demonstrated that the 
combined administration of OFS+MET possessed potentiated effects on the 
glycemia, body weight, and gut microbiome. In addition, fecal samples from the 
MET and MET+OFS group were exchanged and transferred to germ-free rats induced 
by antibiotics. Not surprisingly, the glucose tolerance and serum levels of 
endotoxin, free fatty acids (FFA), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 
interleukin-2 (IL-2), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) were all sustainably improved 
among OFS+MET fecal microbiota-treated DIO rats while the MET fecal 
microbiota-treated ones presented a relatively reverse trend. Furthermore, 
transfer of fecal samples from the rats after 8 weeks of treatment to 
antibiotics-treated germ-free mice significantly improved metabolic profiles, 
including glucose tolerance and weight reduction in mice that received 
MET+OFS-altered microbiota. In conclusion, the present study illustrated that 
the effects of OFS and MET combined treatment on gut microbiota, especially for 
the MET-induced side effect-related ones, and host metabolism were of greater 
magnitude than individual OFS or MET treatment in obese rats and mice. 
Therefore, it is likely that combined administration of OFS and MET may offer a 
novel and promising strategy for reducing side effects induced by MET and 
improving metabolic outcomes, particularly glycemia control and weight 
reduction.

Copyright © 2020 Li, He, Zhang, Zhang, Lian and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00939
PMCID: PMC7052043
PMID: 32158428
