1. Curr Urol Rep. 2020 Mar 18;21(3):15. doi: 10.1007/s11934-020-0967-4.

Preventing Lethal Prostate Cancer with Diet, Supplements, and Rx: Heart Healthy 
Continues to Be Prostate Healthy and "First Do No Harm" Part II.

Moyad MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA. moyad@umich.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss the overall and latest observations of the effect 
of diet, lifestyle, supplements, and some prescription heart healthy medications 
for prostate cancer prevention.
RECENT FINDINGS: The concept of maximizing heart health to prevent aggressive 
prostate cancer continues to be solidified with the addition of more prospective 
observational and randomized controlled trial data. Heart healthy is prostate 
healthy, and heart unhealthy is prostate unhealthy. The primary goal of reducing 
the risk of all-cause and cardiovascular disease (CVD) morbidity and mortality 
also coincides with maximizing prostate cancer prevention. The obesity epidemic 
in children and adults along with recent diverse research has only strengthened 
the nexus between heart and prostate health. Greater dietary adherence toward a 
variety of healthy foods is associated with a graded improved probability of CVD 
and potentially aggressive cancer risk reduction. Preventing prostate cancer via 
dietary supplements should encourage a "first do no harm," or less is more 
approach until future evidence can reverse the concerning trend that more 
supplementation has resulted in either no impact or an increased risk of 
prostate cancer. Supplements to reduce side effects of some cancer treatments 
appear to have more encouraging data. A discussion of quality (QC) before 
utilizing any pill also requires attention. Medications or interventions that 
potentially improve heart health including statins, aspirin, and metformin 
(S.A.M.), specific beta-blocker medications, and even preventive vaccines are in 
general generic, low-cost, "natural," and should continue to garner research 
interest. A watershed moment in medical education has arrived where the past 
perception of a diverse number of trees seemingly separated by vast distances, 
in reality, now appear to exist within the same forest.

DOI: 10.1007/s11934-020-0967-4
PMID: 32185555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
