1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2020 Sep;127(3):211-220. doi:
10.1111/bcpt.13407.  Epub 2020 Apr 3.

Citrus fruit-derived flavonoid naringenin and the expression of hepatic organic 
cation transporter 1 protein in diabetic rats treated with metformin.

Mato Mofo EP(1), Essop MF(2), Owira PMO(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology Research Laboratory, Department of 
Pharmacology, Discipline of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Health Sciences, 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(2)Cardio-Metabolic Research Group (CMRG), Department of Physiological Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.

Naringenin possesses many pharmacological effects and may modulate metformin 
disposition. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of naringenin on 
hepatic expression of organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) protein and its 
associated effects on metformin-associated hyperlactataemia in diabetes. 
Forty-nine male Sprague Dawley rats randomly assigned to seven groups (n = 7) 
were orally treated daily with 3.0 mL/kg body-weight (BW) of distilled water 
(group 1) or 60 mg/kg BW of naringenin (groups 2 and 5) or 250 mg/kg BW of 
metformin (groups 3 and 6), respectively, dissolved in distilled water. 
Similarly, group 7 was given metformin and naringenin. Groups 4, 5, 6 and 7 were 
administered intraperitoneally with streptozotocin at a single dose of 60 mg/kg 
BW to induce diabetes. Glucose tolerance tests were performed. The animals were 
killed after 8 weeks of treatment, blood was collected, and livers excised for 
further biochemical analysis. Lowered body-weight, increased polydipsia and 
reduced hepatic glycogen concentrations were observed in diabetic rats compared 
to controls. Naringenin only significantly decreased plasma lactate levels, 
while metformin only or with naringenin significantly increased plasma lactate 
levels in diabetic compared to non-treated diabetic animals. Metformin only but 
not naringenin significantly increased plasma lactate levels in non-diabetic 
compared to control rats. Furthermore, naringenin with or without metformin but 
not metformin only significantly increased hepatic organic cation transporter 1 
(OCT1) expression in diabetic compared to non-treated diabetic rats. 
Contrastingly, metformin only but not naringenin significantly increased hepatic 
OCT1 expression in non-diabetic rats compared to controls. Diabetic rats treated 
with metformin exhibited significantly increased plasma metformin concentrations 
compared to non-diabetic but naringenin significantly dropped this parameter. 
Conversely, hepatic metformin concentrations were significantly lower in 
diabetic rats treated with metformin compared to non-diabetic rats but 
significantly increased when naringenin was added. These results suggest that 
naringenin ameliorated hyperglycaemia-induced reduction in hepatic OCT1 
expression leading to metformin accumulation and increased lactic acid 
production.

© 2020 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society). Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13407
PMID: 32180335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
