1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020 Aug;1473(1):20-34. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14338. Epub 2020
Mar  24.

Grading animal distress and side effects of therapies.

Kumstel S(1), Wendt EHU(1), Eichberg J(1), Talbot SR(2), Häger C(2), Zhang X(1), 
Abdelrahman A(1), Schönrogge M(1), Palme R(3), Bleich A(2), Vollmar B(1), 
Zechner D(1).

Author information:
(1)Rudolf-Zenker Institute of Experimental Surgery, University Medical Center, 
Rostock, Germany.
(2)Institute for Laboratory Animal Science, Hannover Medical School, Hanover, 
Germany.
(3)Unit of Physiology, Pathophysiology and Experimental Endocrinology, 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, 
Austria.

In order to combine high-quality research with minimal harm to animals, a 
prospective severity assessment for animal experiments is legally required in 
many countries. In addition, an assessment of the evidence-based severity level 
might allow realistic harm-benefit analysis and the appraisal of refinement 
methods. However, only a few examples describe the distress of animals by 
simple, cost-efficient, and noninvasive methods. We, therefore, evaluated the 
severity of an orthotopic mouse model for pancreatic cancer using C57BL/6J mice 
when pursuing two different chemotherapies. We assessed fecal corticosterone 
metabolites, body weight, distress score, and burrowing, as well as nesting 
activity. Moreover, we established a multifactorial model using multivariate 
logistic regression to describe animal distress. This multifactorial analysis 
revealed that metformin + galloflavin treatment caused higher distress than 
metformin + α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate therapy. Similar results were obtained by 
using the best cutoff calculated by Youden's J index when using only single 
parameters, such as burrowing activity or fecal corticosterone metabolite 
concentration. Thus, the present study revealed that single readout parameters, 
as well as multivariate analysis, can help to assess the severity of animal 
experiments and detect side effects of therapies.

© 2020 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC. on behalf of New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14338
PMID: 32207155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
