1. BMC Med. 2020 Mar 24;18(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s12916-020-01516-x.

Adolescent polycystic ovary syndrome according to the international 
evidence-based guideline.

Peña AS(1), Witchel SF(2), Hoeger KM(3), Oberfield SE(4), Vogiatzi MG(5), Misso 
M(6), Garad R(6), Dabadghao P(7), Teede H(6).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide Robinson Research 
Institute and Endocrine Department, Women's and Children's Hospital, 72 King 
William Road, North Adelaide, SA, 5006, Australia. alexia.pena@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, UPMC 
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.
(3)Department of OBGYN, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 
USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Monash Centre for Health Research and Implementation, School of Public Health 
and Preventive Medicine, Monash University and Monash Health, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosing polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) during adolescence is 
challenging because features of normal pubertal development overlap with adult 
diagnostic criteria. The international evidence-based PCOS Guideline aimed to 
promote accurate and timely diagnosis, to optimise consistent care, and to 
improve health outcomes for adolescents and women with PCOS.
METHODS: International healthcare professionals, evidence synthesis teams and 
consumers informed the priorities, reviewed published data and synthesised the 
recommendations for the Guideline. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) framework was applied to appraise the 
evidence quality and the feasibility, acceptability, cost, implementation and 
strength of the recommendations.
RESULTS: This paper focuses on the specific adolescent PCOS Guideline 
recommendations. Specific criteria to improve diagnostic accuracy and avoid over 
diagnosis include: (1) irregular menstrual cycles defined according to years 
post-menarche; > 90 days for any one cycle (> 1 year post-menarche), cycles< 21 
or > 45 days (> 1 to < 3 years post-menarche); cycles < 21 or > 35 days 
(> 3 years post-menarche) and primary amenorrhea by age 15 or > 3 years 
post-thelarche. Irregular menstrual cycles (< 1 year post-menarche) represent 
normal pubertal transition. (2) Hyperandrogenism defined as hirsutism, severe 
acne and/or biochemical hyperandrogenaemia confirmed using validated 
high-quality assays. (3) Pelvic ultrasound not recommended for diagnosis of PCOS 
within 8 years post menarche. (4) Anti-Müllerian hormone levels not recommended 
for PCOS diagnosis; and (5) exclusion of other disorders that mimic PCOS. For 
adolescents who have features of PCOS but do not meet diagnostic criteria an 'at 
risk' label can be considered with appropriate symptomatic treatment and regular 
re-evaluations. Menstrual cycle re-evaluation can occur over 3 years post 
menarche and where only menstrual irregularity or hyperandrogenism are present 
initially, evaluation with ultrasound can occur after 8 years post menarche. 
Screening for anxiety and depression is required and assessment of eating 
disorders warrants consideration. Available data endorse the benefits of healthy 
lifestyle interventions to prevent excess weight gain and should be recommended. 
For symptom management, the combined oral contraceptive pill and/or metformin 
may be beneficial.
CONCLUSIONS: Extensive international engagement accompanied by rigorous 
processes honed both diagnostic criteria and treatment recommendations for PCOS 
during adolescence.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-020-01516-x
PMCID: PMC7092491
PMID: 32204714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Helena Teede: NHMRC grant funding to the 
institution to undertake this work (Funding disclosure). Kathy Hoeger: 
Participation in advisory boards for AbbVie and Bayer pharmaceuticals. The 
pharmaceutical firms listed did not play a role in these guidelines. Other 
authors have no competing interests.
