1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2020 May 15;26(5):312-326. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa023.

Alterations of endometrial epithelial-mesenchymal transition and MAPK signalling 
components in women with PCOS are partially modulated by metformin in vitro.

Hu M(1)(2), Zhang Y(2)(3), Li X(2)(4)(5), Cui P(2)(6), Li J(1)(2), Brännström 
M(7), Shao LR(2), Billig H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, 510120 Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Physiology/Endocrinology, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 40530 Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Key Laboratory and Unit of 
Infertility in Chinese Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Heilongjiang 
University of Chinese Medicine, 150040 Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan 
University, 200011 Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases, 
200011 Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 201203 Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 41345 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Growing evidence suggests that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and its 
regulator mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) contribute to 
endometria-related reproductive disorders. However, the regulation of EMT and 
MAPK signalling components in the endometrium from polycystic ovary syndrome 
(PCOS) patients has not been systematically investigated and remains elusive. In 
humans, how metformin induces molecular alterations in the endometrial tissues 
under PCOS conditions is not completely clear. Here, we recruited 7 non-PCOS 
patients during the proliferative phase (nPCOS), 7 non-PCOS patients with 
endometrial hyperplasia (nPCOSEH), 14 PCOS patients during the proliferative 
phase (PCOS) and 3 PCOS patients with endometrial hyperplasia (PCOSEH). Our 
studies demonstrated that compared with nPCOS, PCOS patients showed decreased 
Claudin 1 and increased Vimentin and Slug proteins. Similar to increased Slug 
protein, nPCOSEH and PCOSEH patients showed increased N-cadherin protein. 
Western blot and immunostaining revealed increased epithelial phosphorylated 
Cytokeratin 8 (p-CK 8) expression and an increased p-CK 8:CK 8 ratio in PCOS, 
nPCOSEH and PCOSEH patients compared to nPCOS patients. Although nPCOSEH and 
PCOSEH patients showed increased p-ERK1/2 and/or p38 protein levels, the 
significant increase in p-ERK1/2 expression and p-ERK1/2:ERK1/2 ratio was only 
found in PCOS patients compared to nPCOS patients. A significant induction of 
the membrane ERβ immunostaining was observed in the epithelial cells of PCOS and 
PCOSEH patients compared to nPCOS and nPCOSEH patients. While in vitro treatment 
with metformin alone increased Snail and decreased Claudin 1, N-cadherin and 
α-SMA proteins, concomitant treatment with metformin and E2 increased the 
expression of CK 8 and Snail proteins and decreased the expression of Claudin 1, 
ZO-1, Slug and α-SMA proteins. Our findings suggest that the EMT contributes to 
the switch from a healthy state to a PCOS state in the endometrium, which might 
subsequently drive endometrial injury and dysfunction. We also provide evidence 
that metformin differentially modulates EMT protein expression in PCOS patients 
depending on oestrogenic stimulation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permission@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa023
PMID: 32202622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
