1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2020 Mar 25;2020:19-0139. doi: 
10.1530/EDM-19-0139. Online ahead of print.

The complicated clinical course in a case of atypical lipodystrophy after 
development of neutralizing antibody to metreleptin: treatment with 
setmelanotide.

Akinci B(1)(2), Meral R(1), Rus D(1), Hench R(1), Neidert AH(1), DiPaola F(3), 
Westerhoff M(4), Taylor SI(5), Oral EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Brehm Center for Diabetes Research and Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology 
& Diabetes, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

SUMMARY: A patient with atypical partial lipodystrophy who had a transient 
initial response to metreleptin experienced acute worsening of her metabolic 
state when neutralizing antibodies against metreleptin appeared. Because her 
metabolic status continued to deteriorate, a therapeutic trial with 
melanocortin-4 receptor agonist setmelanotide, that is believed to function 
downstream from leptin receptor in the leptin signaling system, was undertaken 
in an effort to improve her metabolic status for the first time in a patient 
with lipodystrophy. To achieve this, a compassionate use (investigational new 
drug application; IND) was initiated (NCT03262610). Glucose control, body fat by 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry and MRI, and liver fat by proton density fat 
fraction were monitored. Daily hunger scores were assessed by patient filled 
questionnaires. Although there was a slight decrease in hunger scales and 
visceral fat, stimulating melanocortin-4 receptor by setmelanotide did not 
result in any other metabolic benefit such as improvement of 
hypertriglyceridemia or diabetes control as desired. Targeting melanocortin-4 
receptor to regulate energy metabolism in this setting was not sufficient to 
obtain a significant metabolic benefit. However, complex features of our case 
make it difficult to generalize these observations to all cases of 
lipodystrophy. It is still possible that melanocortin-4 receptor agonistic 
action may offer some therapeutic benefits in leptin-deficient patients.
LEARNING POINTS: A patient with atypical lipodystrophy with an initial benefit 
with metreleptin therapy developed neutralizing antibodies to metreleptin 
(Nab-leptin), which led to substantial worsening in metabolic control. The 
neutralizing activity in her serum persisted for longer than 3 years. Whether 
the worsening in her metabolic state was truly caused by the development of 
Nab-leptin cannot be fully ascertained, but there was a temporal relationship. 
The experience noted in our patient at least raises the possibility for concern 
for substantial metabolic worsening upon emergence and persistence of 
Nab-leptin. Further studies of cases where Nab-leptin is detected and better 
assay systems to detect and characterize Nab-leptin are needed. The use of 
setmelanotide, a selective MC4R agonist targeting specific neurons downstream 
from the leptin receptor activation, was not effective in restoring metabolic 
control in this complex patient with presumed diminished leptin action due to 
Nab-leptin. Although stimulating the MC4R pathway was not sufficient to obtain a 
significant metabolic benefit in lowering triglycerides and helping with her 
insulin resistance as was noted with metreleptin earlier, there was a mild 
reduction in reported food intake and appetite. Complex features of our case 
make it difficult to generalize our observation to all leptin-deficient 
patients. It is possible that some leptin-deficient patients (especially those 
who need primarily control of food intake) may still theoretically benefit from 
MC4R agonistic action, and further studies in carefully selected patients may 
help to tease out the differential pathways of metabolic regulation by the 
complex network of leptin signaling system.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-19-0139
PMCID: PMC7159256
PMID: 32213649
