1. Arch Med Res. 2020 May;51(4):327-335. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.03.006. Epub 
2020 Mar 27.

Host Defense Peptide RNase 7 Is Down-regulated in the Skin of Diabetic Patients 
with or without Chronic Ulcers, and its Expression is Altered with Metformin.

Rodríguez-Carlos A(1), Trujillo V(2), Gonzalez-Curiel I(3), Marin-Luevano S(4), 
Torres-Juarez F(4), Santos-Mena A(4), Rivas-Santiago C(5), Enciso-Moreno JA(4), 
Zaga-Clavellina V(6), Rivas-Santiago B(7).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica-Zacatecas, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro 
Social, Zacatecas, México; División de Medicina Molecular y Traslacional, Centro 
de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud y Biomedicina, Universidad Autónoma de 
San Luis Potosí, San Luis Potosí, México.
(2)Unidad de Investigación Médica-Zacatecas, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro 
Social, Zacatecas, México; Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Facultad de Química, Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas, México.
(4)Unidad de Investigación Médica-Zacatecas, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro 
Social, Zacatecas, México.
(5)Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, Catedras-CONACyT, Mexico; 
Biological Sciences School, Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas, 
México.
(6)Rama de Inmunobioquímica, Instituto Nacional de Perinatologia, Ciudad México, 
México.
(7)Unidad de Investigación Médica-Zacatecas, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro 
Social, Zacatecas, México. Electronic address: rondo_vm@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) are one of the main complications in 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2), previous studies have reported 
that DM2 patients have lower production of host defense peptides (HDP).
AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the expression of RNase 7, cathelicidin, HBD-2, 
and psoriasin in biopsies obtained from DM2 patients with or without DFU.
METHODS: Biopsies from DFU patients grade 3 according to Wagner's 
classification, from diabetic patients without ulcer and from healthy donors 
were obtained. qPCR, immunohistochemistry and cell line cultures were performed. 
To assess whether L-isoleucine, calcitriol, phenyl butyrate, metformin, 
glyburide or insulin induced RNase 7, keratinocytes were stimulated, and RNase 7 
expression was evaluated.
RESULTS: Our data showed that RNase 7 levels were decreased in both diabetic 
groups when were compared with skin from healthy donors. Since most of the DM2 
patients are treated with drugs to reduce glycemia, we investigated whether 
glyburide, metformin or insulin were able to induce any change regarding RNase 7 
production. Results showed that metformin reduces the expression of RNase 7 in 
in vitro treated keratinocytes, suggesting that the chronic use of metformin 
should be evaluated in DFU patients, whereas calcitriol, phenyl butyrate and 
L-isoleucine did not increase the RNase 7 production.
CONCLUSIONS: Due RNase 7 has antimicrobial activity, its downregulation can make 
prone to DM2 patients to develop infections and impaired wound healing.

Copyright © 2020 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.03.006
PMID: 32229156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
