1. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Mar 26;12(4):301. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12040301.

Phenformin Attenuates Renal Injury in Unilateral Ureteral Obstructed Mice 
without Affecting Immune Cell Infiltration.

Nørgård MØ(1), Christensen M(1), Mutsaers HAM(1), Nørregaard R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, N 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.

Phenformin and metformin are antihyperglycemic drugs that belong to the class of 
biguanides. Previously, we demonstrated that metformin elicits renoprotective 
effects in unilateral ureteral obstructed mice by reducing the infiltration of 
immune cells into the kidney. Since phenformin is a more potent drug as compared 
to metformin, we investigated the renoprotective properties of phenformin. We 
studied the efficacy of both drugs using mice that underwent unilateral ureteral 
obstruction. Renal damage was evaluated on RNA and protein level by qPCR, 
Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we studied immune cell 
infiltration using flow cytometry. Both biguanides significantly reduced 
UUO-induced kidney injury, as illustrated by a reduction in KIM-1 protein 
expression. In addition, both metformin and phenformin impacted the gene 
expression of several inflammatory markers but to a different extent. Moreover, 
in contrast to metformin, phenformin did not impact immune cell infiltration 
into UUO kidneys. In conclusion, we demonstrated that phenformin has similar 
renoprotective effects as metformin, but the mechanism of action differs, and 
phenformin is more potent. The beneficial effects of phenformin are probably due 
to inhibition of the STAT3 pathway and mitochondrial complex I. Further research 
is needed to unveil the therapeutic potential of phenformin for the treatment of 
renal injury, either at low, non-toxic concentrations or as part of a 
combination therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12040301
PMCID: PMC7238166
PMID: 32224876

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
