1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020 Mar 27;12(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-00589-3.

Beneficial association of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and statins 
on the occurrence of possible Alzheimer's disease after traumatic brain injury.

Li M(1)(2), Reisman J(1), Morris-Eppolito B(3), Qian SX(1)(4), Kazis LE(1)(4), 
Wolozin B(5), Goldstein LE(6)(7)(8), Xia W(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Edith Nourse 
Rogers Memorial Hospital, Bedford, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Bentley University, Waltham, MA, USA.
(3)Geriatric Research Education Clinical Center, Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial 
Veterans Hospital, Bedford, MA, 01730, USA.
(4)Department of Health Law, Policy and Management, Boston University School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Departments of Radiology, Psychiatry, Neurology, and Pathology, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Departments of Biomedical, Electrical, and Computer Engineering, Boston 
University College of Engineering & Photonics Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Geriatric Research Education Clinical Center, Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial 
Veterans Hospital, Bedford, MA, 01730, USA. weiming.xia@va.gov.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. weiming.xia@va.gov.

BACKGROUND: Pathological analysis of brain tissue from animals and humans with a 
history of traumatic brain injury (TBI) suggests that TBI could be one of the 
risk factors facilitating onset of dementia with possible Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but medications to prevent or delay AD onset are not yet available.
METHODS: This study explores four medication classes (angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), beta blockers, metformin, and statins) approved by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for other indications and evaluates their 
influence when used in combination on the risk of possible AD development for 
patients with a history of TBI. We identified patients with history of TBI from 
an existing Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) national database. Among 
1,660,151 veterans who used VA services between the ages of 50 to 89 years old, 
we analyzed 733,920 patients, including 15,450 patients with a history of TBI 
and 718,470 non-TBI patients. The TBI patients were followed for up to 
18.5 years, with an average of 7.7 ± 4.7 years, and onset of dementia with 
possible AD was recorded based on International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases (ICD) 9 or 10 codes. The effect of TBI on possible AD development was 
evaluated by multivariable logistic regression models adjusted by age, gender, 
race, and other comorbidities. The association of ACEI, beta blockers, 
metformin, statins, and combinations of these agents over time from the first 
occurrence of TBI to possible AD onset was assessed using Cox proportional 
hazard models adjusted for demographics and comorbidities.
RESULTS: Veterans with at least two TBI occurrences by claims data were 25% 
(odds ratio (OR) = 1.25, 95% confidence intervals (CI) (1.13, 1.37)) more likely 
to develop dementia with possible AD, compared to those with no record of TBI. 
In multivariable logistic regression models (propensity score weighted or 
adjusted), veterans taking a combination of ACEI and statins had reduced risk in 
developing possible AD after suffering TBI, and use of this medication class 
combination was associated with a longer period between TBI occurring and 
dementia with possible AD onset, compared to patients who took statins alone or 
did not take any of the four target drugs after TBI.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of ACEI and statins significantly lowered the risk 
of development of dementia with possible AD in a national cohort of people with 
a history of TBI, thus supporting a clinical approach to lowering the risk of 
dementia with possible AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-020-00589-3
PMCID: PMC7102441
PMID: 32220235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All contributing authors declare no potential 
competing interests. This study was approved by the Bedford VA Hospital 
Institutional Review Board. Access of administrative database for outpatient 
visit data and corresponding patients’ prescription data was approved by the 
Bedford VA Hospital Institutional Review Board, Research and Development and the 
VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) Resource Center. The content 
of the manuscript has not been published or submitted for publication elsewhere. 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
