1. Diabetes Care. 2020 Jun;43(6):1209-1218. doi: 10.2337/dc19-2535. Epub 2020 Apr
 1.

Risk of Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events, Severe Hypoglycemia, and All-Cause 
Mortality for Widely Used Antihyperglycemic Dual and Triple Therapies for Type 2 
Diabetes Management: A Cohort Study of All Danish Users.

Jensen MH(1)(2), Kjolby M(3)(4)(5)(6), Hejlesen O(2), Jakobsen PE(7)(8), 
Vestergaard P(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Steno Diabetes Center North Denmark, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark mhj@hst.aau.dk.
(2)Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(5)Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Danish Diabetes Academy, Novo Nordisk Foundation, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Steno Diabetes Center North Denmark, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(9)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The vast number of antihyperglycemic medications and growing amount 
of evidence make clinical decision making difficult. The aim of this study was 
to investigate the safety of antihyperglycemic dual and triple therapies for 
type 2 diabetes management with respect to major adverse cardiovascular events, 
severe hypoglycemia, and all-cause mortality in a real-life clinical setting.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Cox regression models were constructed to analyze 
20 years of data from the Danish National Patient Registry with respect to 
effect of the antihyperglycemic therapies on the three end points.
RESULTS: A total of 66,807 people with type 2 diabetes were treated with 
metformin (MET) plus a combination of second- and third-line therapies. People 
on MET plus sulfonylurea (SU) had the highest risk of all end points, except for 
severe hypoglycemia, for which people on MET plus basal insulin (BASAL) had a 
higher risk. The lowest risk of major adverse cardiovascular events was seen for 
people on a regimen including a glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor 
agonist. People treated with MET, GLP-1, and BASAL had a lower risk of all three 
end points than people treated with MET and BASAL, especially for severe 
hypoglycemia. The lowest risk of all three end points was, in general, seen for 
people treated with MET, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, and GLP-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study do not support SU as the second-line 
treatment choice for patients with type 2 diabetes. Moreover, the results 
indicate that adding a GLP-1 in people treated with MET and BASAL could be 
considered, especially if those people suffer from severe hypoglycemia.

© 2020 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc19-2535
PMID: 32238426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
