1. Anticancer Res. 2020 Apr;40(4):2209-2217. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.14182.

Impact of Concomitant Medication Administered at the Time of Initiation of 
Nivolumab Therapy on Outcome in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.

Svaton M(1), Zemanova M(2), Zemanova P(2), Kultan J(3), Fischer O(3), Skrickova 
J(4), Jakubikova L(4), Cernovska M(5), Hrnciarik M(6), Jirousek M(6), Krejci 
J(7), Krejci D(7), Bilek O(8), Blazek J(9), Hurdalkova K(10), Barinova M(10), 
Melichar B(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology and Phthisiology, Charles University, Faculty of 
Medicine in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic svatonm@fnplzen.cz.
(2)Department of Oncology, Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine in 
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Palacky University, Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Respiratory Diseases and TB, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University Brno and University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine of Charles 
University, Thomayer Hospital Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec 
Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Pneumology, Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(8)Department of Comprehensive Oncology, Masaryk Institute of Oncology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(9)Department of Pneumology and Phthisiology, Charles University, Faculty of 
Medicine in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(10)Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(11)Department of Oncology, Palacky University, Faculty of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Olomouc, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2022 Mar;42(3):1659.

AIM: To investigate potential association between administration of 
corticosteroids, antibiotics, probiotics, proton pump inhibitors, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), statins and metformin and outcome in patients 
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with nivolumab.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 224 patients with advanced NSCLC treated at 
nine comprehensive cancer centers were analyzed in this national retrospective 
study. Survival statistics were evaluated using Kaplan-Meier method and Cox 
analysis.
RESULTS: Only corticosteroid use had a significant negative effect on the 
objective response rate. In the univariate analysis, there was no significant 
effect of the studied concomitant medications on the efficacy of nivolumab. In a 
subsequent multifactorial analysis, a possible positive effect of the 
concomitant use of NSAID at the initiation of nivolumab treatment was revealed.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present retrospective exploratory analysis 
underscore the importance of knowing the exact type of concomitant medication, 
the route of administration, the dose of medication, and the region of the 
ongoing study. The present data indicated a significantly higher rate of 
progression in patients treated with corticosteroids and the possible positive 
effect of NSAID use at the initiation of nivolumab treatment.

Copyright© 2020, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.14182
PMID: 32234916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
