1. Cell Stem Cell. 2020 Jun 4;26(6):910-925.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2020.03.006. 
Epub 2020 Apr 2.

A Metformin-Responsive Metabolic Pathway Controls Distinct Steps in Gastric 
Progenitor Fate Decisions and Maturation.

Miao ZF(1), Adkins-Threats M(2), Burclaff JR(2), Osaki LH(2), Sun JX(1), Kefalov 
Y(2), He Z(3), Wang ZN(4), Mills JC(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Surgical Oncology and 
General Surgery, Key Laboratory of Precision Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Gastrointestinal Tumors, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 
China.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, First 
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology and General Surgery, Key Laboratory of 
Precision Diagnosis and Treatment of Gastrointestinal Tumors, First Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of 
Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 
USA. Electronic address: jmills@wustl.edu.

Cellular metabolism plays important functions in dictating stem cell behaviors, 
although its role in stomach epithelial homeostasis has not been evaluated in 
depth. Here, we show that the energy sensor AMP kinase (AMPK) governs gastric 
epithelial progenitor differentiation. Administering the AMPK activator 
metformin decreases epithelial progenitor proliferation and increases 
acid-secreting parietal cells (PCs) in mice and organoids. AMPK activation 
targets Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), known to govern progenitor proliferation 
and PC fate choice, and PGC1α, which we show controls PC maturation after their 
specification. PC-specific deletion of AMPKα or PGC1α causes defective PC 
maturation, which could not be rescued by metformin. However, metformin 
treatment still increases KLF4 levels and suppresses progenitor proliferation. 
Thus, AMPK activates KLF4 in progenitors to reduce self-renewal and promote PC 
fate, whereas AMPK-PGC1α activation within the PC lineage promotes maturation, 
providing a potential suggestion for why metformin increases acid secretion and 
reduces gastric cancer risk in humans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2020.03.006
PMCID: PMC7275895
PMID: 32243780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
