1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020 Apr 7;9(7):e015154. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.119.015154. Epub 
2020 Apr 4.

Metformin Improves Cardiac Metabolism and Function, and Prevents Left 
Ventricular Hypertrophy in Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats.

Li J(1), Minćzuk K(1)(2), Massey JC(1)(3), Howell NL(4), Roy RJ(1), Paul S(1), 
Patrie JT(5), Kramer CM(6), Epstein FH(3), Carey RM(4), Taegtmeyer H(7), Keller 
SR(4), Kundu BK(1)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging University of Virginia 
Charlottesville VA.
(2)Department of Experimental Physiology and Pathophysiology Medical University 
of Białystok Białystok Poland.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Virginia Charlottesville 
VA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism Department of Medicine University of 
Virginia Charlottesville VA.
(5)Department of Public Health Sciences University of Virginia Charlottesville 
VA.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine University of Virginia Charlottesville 
VA.
(7)McGovern Medical School The University of Texas Health Science Center, 
Houston, TX.
(8)Cardiovascular Research Center University of Virginia Charlottesville VA.

Erratum in
    J Am Heart Assoc. 2020 Jun 16;9(12):e014528.

Background In spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) we observed profound 
myocardial metabolic changes during early hypertension before development of 
cardiac dysfunction and left ventricular hypertrophy. In this study, we 
evaluated whether metformin improved myocardial metabolic abnormalities and 
simultaneously prevented contractile dysfunction and left ventricular 
hypertrophy in SHR. Methods and Results SHR and control Wistar-Kyoto rats were 
treated with metformin from 2 to 5 months of age, when SHR hearts exhibit 
metabolic abnormalities and develop cardiac dysfunction and left ventricular 
hypertrophy. We evaluated the effect of metformin on myocardial glucose uptake 
rates with dynamic 2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission 
tomography. We used cardiac MRI in vivo to assess the effect of metformin on 
ejection fraction, left ventricular mass, and end-diastolic wall thickness, and 
also analyzed metabolites, AMP-activated protein kinase and mammalian 
target-of-rapamycin activities, and mean arterial blood pressure. 
Metformin-treated SHR had lower mean arterial blood pressure but remained 
hypertensive. Cardiac glucose uptake rates, left ventricular mass/tibia length, 
wall thickness, and circulating free fatty acid levels decreased to normal, and 
ejection fraction improved in treated SHR. Hearts of treated SHR exhibited 
increased AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylation and reduced mammalian 
target-of-rapamycin activity. Cardiac metabolite profiling demonstrated that 
metformin decreased fatty acyl carnitines and markers of oxidative stress in 
SHR. Conclusions Metformin reduced blood pressure, normalized myocardial glucose 
uptake, prevented left ventricular hypertrophy, and improved cardiac function in 
SHR. Metformin may exert its effects by normalizing myocardial AMPK and 
mammalian target-of-rapamycin activities, improving fatty acid oxidation, and 
reducing oxidative stress. Thus, metformin may be a new treatment to prevent or 
ameliorate chronic hypertension-induced left ventricular hypertrophy.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.119.015154
PMCID: PMC7428616
PMID: 32248762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
