1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2020 Jul 13;101:109941. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.109941. Epub 2020 Mar 31.

Antipsychotic-induced Hyperprolactinemia in aging populations: Prevalence, 
implications, prevention and management.

González-Rodríguez A(1), Labad J(2), Seeman MV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Health. Parc Tauli University Hospital. I3PT. Sabadell 
(Barcelona, Spain) Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB).. Electronic 
address: agonzalezro@tauli.cat.
(2)Department of Mental Health. Parc Tauli University Hospital. I3PT. Sabadell 
(Barcelona, Spain) Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB). CIBERSAM.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
M5P 3L6.

This paper reviews the prevalence, implications, prevention and management of 
antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia in aging populations. Antipsychotics 
are indicated mainly for the treatment of psychotic illness but are also used in 
other conditions. Complications induced by antipsychotics increase with age, due 
to age-related changes in drug metabolism and excretion. Almost all 
antipsychotics lead to hyperprolactinemia by blocking dopamine D2 receptors in 
the anterior pituitary gland, which counteracts dopamine's inhibitory action on 
prolactin secretion. The main findings of this narrative review are that, though 
many of the known side effects of high prolactin levels lose their salience with 
age, the risk of exacerbating osteoporosis remains critical. Methods of 
preventing antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia in older individuals include 
using antipsychotic medication (AP) as sparingly as possible and monitoring AP 
serum levels, regularly measuring prolactin levels, closely monitoring bone 
density, treating substance abuse, and teaching patients stress management 
techniques. When hyperprolactinemia symptoms cannot be otherwise managed, 
adjunctive drugs are available. Potential helpful adjuncts are: dopamine 
agonists, antipsychotics with partial agonist properties (e.g. aripiprazole), 
selective estrogen receptor modulators, and metformin. Because a gold standard 
for prevention/treatment has not been established, clinical decisions need to be 
made based on safety and individual circumstance.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.109941
PMID: 32243999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
report no conflicts of interest regarding the content of the manuscript.
