1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Apr;99(14):e19683. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000019683.

Metformin and acupuncture for polycystic ovary syndrome: A protocol for a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Gao Y(1), Xu S, Shen Y, Liao T, Hu S, Zhou S, Chen Q.

Author information:
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, PR China.

BACKGROUNDS: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder in 
women and can lead to serious social burdens associated with various 
reproductive and metabolic abnormalities. Studies have demonstrated that 
metformin can reduce liver glucose in PCOS, lower testosterone levels and 
increase peripheral insulin sensitivity. There has been also evidence suggesting 
acupuncture may influence ovulation (release of the egg) by affecting levels of 
various hormones. We will conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis is to 
compare the efficacy and safety of metformin with or without acupuncture in 
PCOS.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will search publications from Web of Science, PubMed, 
Science Direct, Wan Fang Data Knowledge Service Platform, Chinese Biomedical 
Literature Database (CBM), Chinese Scientific Journal Database (VIP database), 
China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) and EMBASE, which should be 
published from inception to February 2020. Two researchers will independently 
perform the selection of the studies, data extraction, and synthesis. The 
Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool will be used to evaluate the risk of bias of the 
randomized controlled trials. Statistical analysis will be performed by using 
the Cochrane Review Manager (RevMan 5.3) software. The I test will be used to 
identify the extent of heterogeneity. We will use the Egger funnel chart to 
evaluate possible publication biases, in addition, when possible we will perform 
a subgroup/meta-regression analysis. The strength of the evidence will be 
assessed according to the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, 
and Evaluation (GRADE).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: This study will systematically evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of Metformin combined with acupuncture in the treatment of PCOS, thus 
providing evidence to the clinical application of this combination therapy. The 
results will be published in a peer-reviewed journal.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019683
PMCID: PMC7440049
PMID: 32243405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
