1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2020 May;87(5):620-629. doi: 10.1002/mrd.23342. Epub 2020 Apr
5.

Effect of metformin on testicular expression and localization of leptin receptor 
and levels of leptin in the diabetic mice.

Annie L(1), Jeremy M(1), Gurusubramanian G(1), Derkach KV(2), Shpakov AO(2), Roy 
VK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram, India.
(2)IM Sechenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry, Laboratory 
of Molecular Endocrinology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.

Diabetes mellitus impairs testicular activity and leads to infertility. Leptin 
is one of the endogenous regulators of the male reproductive functions, but the 
role of leptin and its receptor (LEPR/Ob-R) in the control of testosterone 
production and testicular proliferation has not been investigated so far, 
especially in the Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM1). Metformin is an 
anti-hyperglycemic drug which is beneficial for treating the both DM2 and DM1. 
The aim of this work was to study the possible role of leptin and Ob-R in the 
regulation of steroidogenesis and proliferation in the testes of mice with 
streptozotocin-induced DM1 (75 mg/kg/day, 4 days) and to estimate the restoring 
effect of metformin treatment (500 mg/kg, 2 weeks) on the diabetic testes. In 
the diabetic testes, the plasma and intratesticular leptin levels and plasma 
testosterone levels were reduced and completely restored by metformin treatment. 
Metformin also restored the expression of the steroidogenic transport protein 
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein reduced in DM1. In the diabetic testes, 
the expression of Ob-R was downregulated and the immunolocalization of Ob-R 
showed weak staining in the Leydig cells, the primary spermatocytes and the 
round spermatids. The germ cell proliferation was also reduced in DM1, as 
noticed with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression. Metformin 
increased the Ob-R expression and immunostaining in the different cell types and 
improved the PCNA expression. Thus, DM1 impairs the testicular steroidogenesis 
and proliferation by inhibiting the leptin signaling, causing a decrease in 
leptin levels and Ob-R expression in the testes of diabetic mice, while 
metformin improves the leptin signaling and restores testosterone production and 
testicular proliferation.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.23342
PMID: 32249489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
