1. J Tradit Chin Med. 2020 Apr;40(2):197-203.

Effects of a fermented buckwheat flower and leaf extract on the blood glucose 
and lipid profile of type 2 diabetic db/db mice.

Wang J(1), Yu X(2), Jiang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Li Y, Han S(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)North China University of Science and Technology, Jitang College, Tangshan 
063000, China.
(2)North China University of Science and Technology, Clinical Medical College, 
Tangshan 063000, China.
(3)North China University of Science and Technology, Basic Medical College, 
Tangshan 063000, China.
(4)Hebei Key Laboratory on Chronic Diseases, Tangshan 063000, China.
(5)Tangshan Basic Clinical Research Key Laboratory on Chronic Diseases, Tangshan 
063000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of a fermented buckwheat flower and leaf 
extract (EFBFL) for the reduction of blood glucose and lipid dysregulation in 
spontaneously obese type 2 diabetic db/db mice, and to explore the possible 
mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Forty 9-week-old male db/db mice were randomly allocated to a high-dose 
EFBFL group (EFBFL-H), a low-dose EFBFL group (EFBFL-L), a metformin 
hydrochloride positive control group (MEG), and a db/db control group (MG), and 
there was also a db/m negative control group (NCG) (n = 10). Oral glucose 
tolerance tests (OGTT) were performed after 7 weeks of treatment. At the end of 
8 weeks of treatment, random blood glucose (RBG), glycosylated hemoglobin 
(HbAlc), fasting plasma glucose (FPG), fasting serum insulin (FINS) , 
triglyceride (TG), serum total cholesterol (TC), free fatty acids (FFA), 
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol 
(LDL-c) were measured, the homeostasis model assessment-insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR) was calculated. Immunohistochemistry and western blotting measured the 
expression of glucose transporter4 (GLUT4) and peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor γ (PPAR-γ) by in skeletal muscle.
RESULTS: The MG mice had a significantly increased in RBG, HbAlc, the HOMA-IR 
level, the serum of TG, TC, LDL-c, but a decreased in glucose tolerance and the 
protein expression of GLUT4 and PPAR-γ compared with the NCG. Compared with the 
MG, EFBFL groups significantly decreased RBG, HbAlc, and the HOMA-IR level, 
increased glucose tolerance. Meanwhile EFBFL groups reduced the serum TG, TC, 
and LDL-c in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, EFBFL increased the protein 
expression of GLUT4 and PPAR-γ in the skeletal muscle of db/db mice. There was 
significant difference between the MG group and EFBFL groups.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that EFBFL has anti-diabetic effects in db/db 
mice, ameliorating glucose intolerance, lipid dysregulation, and insulin 
resistance.

PMID: 32242385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
