1. Korean J Intern Med. 2021 Mar;36(Suppl 1):S196-S206. doi:
10.3904/kjim.2019.336.  Epub 2020 Apr 3.

Metformin enhances the cytotoxic effect of nilotinib and overcomes nilotinib 
resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Na YJ(1), Yu ES(2), Kim DS(2), Lee DH(1)(2), Oh SC(1)(2), Choi CW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain Korea 21 Plus Program for Biomedicine Science, Korea University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Oncology and Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Nilotinib is used for treating patients with imatinib-sensitive 
or -resistant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML); however, nilotinib-resistant cases 
have been observed in recent years. In addition, a considerable number of 
patients receiving nilotinib developed diabetes. Metformin is a front-line drug 
for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, and several studies have shown that 
diabetes patients treated with metformin have reduced incidence of cancer. This 
study aimed to define the effect of metformin on CML cells to determine whether 
metformin overcomes nilotinib resistance, and to identify novel targets for the 
treatment of nilotinib resistance.
METHODS: We observed the effects of metformin and nilotinib on K562 and KU812 
human CML cell lines. Nilotinib-resistant CML cell lines were generated by 
exposing cells to gradually increasing doses of nilotinib. Then, we investigated 
the driving force that makes resistance to nilotinib and the effect of metformin 
on the driving force.
RESULTS: Sub-toxic doses of metformin enhanced nilotinib efficacy by reducing 
Bcl-xL expression, which induces apoptosis in CML cells. Next, we generated 
nilotinib-resistant K562 and KU812 cell lines that overexpressed the c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) gene. JNK silencing by a JNK inhibitor restored 
sensitivity to nilotinib. Furthermore, metformin was effective in decreasing 
phosphorylated JNK levels, restoring nilotinib sensitivity. Combined treatment 
with nilotinib and metformin was more effective than combined treatment with 
nilotinib and a JNK inhibitor in terms of cell proliferation inhibition.
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that combination therapy with metformin and 
nilotinib may have clinical benefits of enhancing antileukemia efficacy and 
overcoming resistance to nilotinib.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2019.336
PMCID: PMC8009173
PMID: 32241082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.
