1. Carcinogenesis. 2020 Dec 31;41(12):1735-1745. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgaa032.

Mitochondrial DNA mutations induce mitochondrial biogenesis and increase the 
tumorigenic potential of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells.

Haumann S(1)(2), Boix J(1), Knuever J(1)(3), Bieling A(1), Vila Sanjurjo A(4), 
Elson JL(5)(6), Blakely EL(7), Taylor RW(7), Riet N(8), Abken H(8)(9)(10), 
Kashkar H(9)(11)(12), Hornig-Do HT(1), Wiesner RJ(1)(9)(12).

Author information:
(1)Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Vegetative 
Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty and University Hospital of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Medical Faculty and University Hospital of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Grupo GIBE, Departamento de Bioloxía Celular e Molecular, Facultade de 
Ciencias, Universidade de A Coruña (UDC), A Coruña, Spain.
(5)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(6)Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(7)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne UK.
(8)Department I for Internal Medicine, Medical Faculty and University of 
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(9)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, 50931 Cologne (CMMC), University of 
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(10)RCI, Regensburg Center for Interventional Immunology, Chair 
Gene-Immunotherapy, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(11)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Medical Faculty 
and University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(12)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated 
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Functioning mitochondria are crucial for cancer metabolism, but aerobic 
glycolysis is still considered to be an important pathway for energy production 
in many tumor cells. Here we show that two well established, classic Hodgkin 
lymphoma (cHL) cell lines harbor deleterious variants within mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) and thus exhibit reduced steady-state levels of respiratory chain 
complexes. However, instead of resulting in the expected bioenergetic defect, 
these mtDNA variants evoke a retrograde signaling response that induces 
mitochondrial biogenesis and ultimately results in increased mitochondrial mass 
as well as function and enhances proliferation in vitro as well as tumor growth 
in mice in vivo. When complex I assembly was impaired by knockdown of one of its 
subunits, this led to further increased mitochondrial mass and function and, 
consequently, further accelerated tumor growth in vivo. In contrast, inhibition 
of mitochondrial respiration in vivo by the mitochondrial complex I inhibitor 
metformin efficiently slowed down growth. We conclude that, as a new mechanism, 
mildly deleterious mtDNA variants in cHL cancer cells cause an increase of 
mitochondrial mass and enhanced function as a compensatory effect using a 
retrograde signaling pathway, which provides an obvious advantage for tumor 
growth.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgaa032
PMID: 32255484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
