1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020 Jun;40(6):1543-1558. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313883. Epub 2020 Apr 9.

Treatment With Treprostinil and Metformin Normalizes Hyperglycemia and Improves 
Cardiac Function in Pulmonary Hypertension Associated With Heart Failure With 
Preserved Ejection Fraction.

Wang L(1)(2), Halliday G(3), Huot JR(4), Satoh T(1)(5), Baust JJ(1), Fisher 
A(3), Cook T(3), Hu J(1), Avolio T(1), Goncharov DA(1), Bai Y(3), Vanderpool 
RR(6), Considine RV(7), Bonetto A(4), Tan J(8), Bachman TN(1), Sebastiani A(1), 
McTiernan CF(1), Mora AL(1)(8), Machado RF(3), Goncharova EA(1)(8), Gladwin 
MT(1)(8), Lai YC(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)From the Pittsburgh Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute (L.W., 
T.S., J.J.B., J.H., T.A., D.A.G., T.N.B., A.S., C.F.M., A.L.M., E.A.G., M.T.G.), 
University of Pittsburgh, PA.
(2)The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China 
(L.W.).
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Occupational Medicine (G.H., 
A.F., T.C., Y.B., R.F.M., Y.-C.L.), Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(4)Department of Surgery (J.R.H., A.B.), Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan (T.S.).
(6)Division of Translational and Regenerative Medicine, University of Arizona, 
Tucson (R.R.V.).
(7)Division of Endocrinology (R.V.C.), Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine (J.T., A.L.M., 
E.A.G., M.T.G.), University of Pittsburgh, PA.
(9)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology & Physiology (Y.-C.L.), Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020 Sep;40(9):e260-e261.
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020 Oct;40(10):e273.

OBJECTIVE: Pulmonary hypertension (PH) due to left heart disease (group 2), 
especially in the setting of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction 
(HFpEF), is the most common cause of PH worldwide; however, at present, there is 
no proven effective therapy available for its treatment. PH-HFpEF is associated 
with insulin resistance and features of metabolic syndrome. The stable 
prostacyclin analog, treprostinil, is an effective and widely used Food and Drug 
Administration-approved drug for the treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. While the effect of treprostinil on metabolic syndrome is unknown, 
a recent study suggests that the prostacyclin analog beraprost can improve 
glucose intolerance and insulin sensitivity. We sought to evaluate the 
effectiveness of treprostinil in the treatment of metabolic syndrome-associated 
PH-HFpEF. Approach and Results: Treprostinil treatment was given to mice with 
mild metabolic syndrome-associated PH-HFpEF induced by high-fat diet and to 
SU5416/obese ZSF1 rats, a model created by the treatment of rats with a more 
profound metabolic syndrome due to double leptin receptor defect (obese ZSF1) 
with a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor blocker SU5416. In high-fat 
diet-exposed mice, chronic treatment with treprostinil reduced hyperglycemia and 
pulmonary hypertension. In SU5416/Obese ZSF1 rats, treprostinil improved 
hyperglycemia with similar efficacy to that of metformin (a first-line drug for 
type 2 diabetes mellitus); the glucose-lowering effect of treprostinil was 
further potentiated by the combined treatment with metformin. Early treatment 
with treprostinil in SU5416/Obese ZSF1 rats lowered pulmonary pressures, and a 
late treatment with treprostinil together with metformin improved pulmonary 
artery acceleration time to ejection time ratio and tricuspid annular plane 
systolic excursion with AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) activation in 
skeletal muscle and the right ventricle.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a potential use of treprostinil as an early 
treatment for mild metabolic syndrome-associated PH-HFpEF and that combined 
treatment with treprostinil and metformin may improve hyperglycemia and cardiac 
function in a more severe disease.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313883
PMCID: PMC7255946
PMID: 32268788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr. Gladwin is a co-inventor of 
pending patent applications and planned patents directed to the use of 
recombinant neuroglobin and heme-based molecules as antidotes for CO poisoning, 
which have been licensed by Globin Solutions, Inc. Globin Solutions, Inc. also 
has an option to a potential therapeutic for CO poisoning from VCU, 
hydroxycobalamin. Dr. Gladwin is a shareholder, advisor, and director in Globin 
Solutions, Inc. Dr. Gladwin is also co-inventor on patents directed to the use 
of nitrite salts in cardiovascular diseases, which were previously licensed to 
United Therapeutics and Hope Pharmaceuticals, and is now licensed to Globin 
Solutions. Additionally, Dr. Gladwin is a co-investigator in a research 
collaboration with Bayer Pharmaceuticals to evaluate riociguat as a treatment 
for patients with sickle cell disease, and is a consultant for Bayer and 
Complexa pharmaceuticals. The other authors report no conflicts.
