1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 May;31(5):907-919. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020010010. Epub
2020  Apr 10.

Role of Impaired Nutrient and Oxygen Deprivation Signaling and Deficient 
Autophagic Flux in Diabetic CKD Development: Implications for Understanding the 
Effects of Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2-Inhibitors.

Packer M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Baylor Heart and Vascular Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas milton.packer@baylorhealth.edu.
(2)Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Growing evidence indicates that oxidative and endoplasmic reticular stress, 
which trigger changes in ion channels and inflammatory pathways that may 
undermine cellular homeostasis and survival, are critical determinants of injury 
in the diabetic kidney. Cells are normally able to mitigate these cellular 
stresses by maintaining high levels of autophagy, an intracellular 
lysosome-dependent degradative pathway that clears the cytoplasm of 
dysfunctional organelles. However, the capacity for autophagy in both podocytes 
and renal tubular cells is markedly impaired in type 2 diabetes, and this 
deficiency contributes importantly to the intensity of renal injury. The primary 
drivers of autophagy in states of nutrient and oxygen deprivation-sirtuin-1 
(SIRT1), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and hypoxia-inducible factors 
(HIF-1α and HIF-2α)-can exert renoprotective effects by promoting autophagic 
flux and by exerting direct effects on sodium transport and inflammasome 
activation. Type 2 diabetes is characterized by marked suppression of SIRT1 and 
AMPK, leading to a diminution in autophagic flux in glomerular podocytes and 
renal tubules and markedly increasing their susceptibility to renal injury. 
Importantly, because insulin acts to depress autophagic flux, these derangements 
in nutrient deprivation signaling are not ameliorated by antihyperglycemic drugs 
that enhance insulin secretion or signaling. Metformin is an established AMPK 
agonist that can promote autophagy, but its effects on the course of CKD have 
been demonstrated only in the experimental setting. In contrast, the effects of 
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors may be related primarily to 
enhanced SIRT1 and HIF-2α signaling; this can explain the effects of SGLT2 
inhibitors to promote ketonemia and erythrocytosis and potentially underlies 
their actions to increase autophagy and mute inflammation in the diabetic 
kidney. These distinctions may contribute importantly to the consistent benefit 
of SGLT2 inhibitors to slow the deterioration in glomerular function and reduce 
the risk of ESKD in large-scale randomized clinical trials of patients with type 
2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2020010010
PMCID: PMC7217421
PMID: 32276962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
