1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2020 Apr 10;22(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s13075-020-02174-3.

Metformin rescues rapamycin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and attenuates 
rheumatoid arthritis with metabolic syndrome.

Kim EK(1)(2), Min HK(3), Lee SY(1), Kim DS(1), Ryu JG(1), Na HS(1), Jung KA(1), 
Choi JW(1), Park SH(4), Cho ML(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic Institutes of Medical Science, College 
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 222, Banpo-Daero, Seocho-gu, 
Seoul, 06591, Republic of Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Immune Network, Conversant Research Consortium in Immunologic 
Disease, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University 
Medical Center, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, 137-070, 
South Korea.
(5)Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic Institutes of Medical Science, College 
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 222, Banpo-Daero, Seocho-gu, 
Seoul, 06591, Republic of Korea. iammila@catholic.ac.kr.
(6)Laboratory of Immune Network, Conversant Research Consortium in Immunologic 
Disease, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. iammila@catholic.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Rapamycin, an inhibitor of the serine/threonine protein kinase mTOR, 
is an immunosuppressant used to treat renal transplant recipients, but it can 
cause endothelial and mitochondrial dysfunction. Metformin is used for the 
treatment of type 2 diabetes and was reported to exert therapeutic effects 
against rheumatoid arthritis and obesity by improving mitochondrial dysfunction 
via the activation of fibroblast growth factor 21. We investigated the 
therapeutic effects of rapamycin-metformin combination therapy in obese mice 
with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were treated with rapamycin, metformin, or 
rapamycin-metformin, and their respiratory level and mitochondrial gene 
expression were assayed. Mice were fed a high-fat diet, immunized with type II 
collagen, and subsequently treated with rapamycin-metformin daily for 10 weeks.
RESULTS: Rapamycin-treated cells exhibited dysfunction of mitochondrial 
respiration and decreased mitochondrial gene expression compared with 
rapamycin-metformin-treated cells. Moreover, rapamycin-metformin reduced the 
clinical arthritis score and the extent of histological inflammation and 
improved the metabolic profile in obese mice with CIA. Rapamycin-metformin 
enhanced the balance between T helper 17 and regulatory T cells in vitro and in 
vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rapamycin-metformin is a potential 
therapeutic option for autoimmune arthritis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-020-02174-3
PMCID: PMC7149912
PMID: 32276645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no competing 
interest.

BACKGROUND: Rapamycin, an inhibitor of the serine/threonine protein kinase mTOR, is an immunosuppressant used to treat renal transplant recipients, but it can cause endothelial and mitochondrial dysfunction. Metformin is used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and was reported to exert therapeutic effects against rheumatoid arthritis and obesity by improving mitochondrial dysfunction via the activation of fibroblast growth factor 21. We investigated the therapeutic effects of rapamycin-metformin combination therapy in obese mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).  METHODS: Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were treated with rapamycin, metformin, or rapamycin-metformin, and their respiratory level and mitochondrial gene expression were assayed. Mice were fed a high-fat diet, immunized with type II collagen, and subsequently treated with rapamycin-metformin daily for 10 weeks.  RESULTS: Rapamycin-treated cells exhibited dysfunction of mitochondrial respiration and decreased mitochondrial gene expression compared with rapamycin-metformin-treated cells. Moreover, rapamycin-metformin reduced the clinical arthritis score and the extent of histological inflammation and improved the metabolic profile in obese mice with CIA. Rapamycin-metformin enhanced the balance between T helper 17 and regulatory T cells in vitro and in vivo.  CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rapamycin-metformin is a potential therapeutic option for autoimmune arthritis.

