1. Endokrynol Pol. 2020;71(3):249-255. doi: 10.5603/EP.a2020.0017. Epub 2020 Apr 
15.

An investigation of saliva and plasma levels of urotensin 2 in recently 
diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus patients on metformin treatment.

Gozel N(1), Oral K(2), Ozdemir FA(3), Onalan E(2), Kuloglu T(4), Aydın S(5), 
Karataş A(6), Kılınç F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, 
Elazig, Turkey. drngozel@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, 
Elazig, Turkey.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science and Art, 
Bingol University, Bingol, Turkey.
(4)Deparment of Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, 
Turkey.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, 
Turkey.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, 
Turkey.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a primary disease of the carbohydrate 
metabolism that is characterised by absolute or relative insulin deficiency, or 
insulin resistance. Although life expectancy is low for diabetic patients, the 
prognosis has been improved in recent decades. Metformin is an oral antidiabetic 
that reduces insulin resistance and plasma glucose levels by decreasing glucose 
production in the liver. It can be used as a standalone treatment or in 
combination with other antidiabetic medications or insulin. Urotensin 2 (U-II), 
which is one of the most effective known vasoconstrictor peptides, was observed 
to act as a vasoconstrictor in diseases such as hypertension and heart failure, 
and to induce vasodilation in healthy volunteers. Some studies have proposed 
that the activation of the U-II system could lead to metabolic syndrome. Certain 
studies have determined a link between DM and U-II. However, there exist no 
studies on the effects of U-II in recently diagnosed type 2 DM patients after 
metformin treatment. This study aims to investigate the plasma and saliva levels 
of U-II at diagnosis and after a three-month metformin treatment in recently 
diagnosed type 2 DM patients, and to compare these levels to those of healthy 
volunteers.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Our study compared 30 recently diagnosed type 2 DM 
patients to their states after three-month metformin treatment and 30 healthy 
volunteers.
RESULTS: When compared with the control group, there was no significant increase 
in the plasma and saliva U-II levels of recently diagnosed type 2 DM patients. 
We determined a statistically significant increase in the plasma and saliva 
ureotensin-2 levels of recently diagnosed type 2 DM patients after a three-month 
metformin treatment (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: It was concluded that the patients with type 2 DM have a 
multifactorial aetiopathogenesis and an increase in U-II levels after metformin 
treatment. Metformin has no known effect on the U-II metabolism; therefore, the 
findings need confirmation through more clinical and experimental studies with 
more participants.

DOI: 10.5603/EP.a2020.0017
PMID: 32293703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
