1. Chem Biol Interact. 2020 Jun 1;324:109093. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2020.109093.
Epub  2020 Apr 13.

Nicotinamide and its metabolite N1-Methylnicotinamide alleviate endocrine and 
metabolic abnormalities in adipose and ovarian tissues in rat model of 
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.

Nejabati HR(1), Samadi N(2), Shahnazi V(3), Mihanfar A(4), Fattahi A(3), Latifi 
Z(5), Bahrami-Asl Z(6), Roshangar L(7), Nouri M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Laboratories, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Stem Cell Research Center, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Student Research Committee, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Laboratories, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Reproductive Biology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Urmia University of Medical 
Sciences, Urmia, Iran.
(5)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Institute, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(6)Department of Reproductive Biology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences Tabriz, Iran; Department of Biology and 
Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran. Electronic address: lroshangar@yahoo.com.
(8)Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran; Department of Reproductive Biology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address: 
nourimd@yahoo.com.

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS), as a common endocrine disorder is accompanied 
by hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, ovulation problems, and infertility. 
Various types of off-label drugs like metformin have been used for the 
management of targeted problems caused by PCOS such as insulin resistance and 
hyperandrogenism. Nicotinamide (NAM) acts as a substrate of visfatin and 
Nicotinamide N-Methyltransferase (NNMT) leading to the generation of 
Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD) and N1-Methylnicotinamide (MNAM), 
respectively. MNAM is known as an anti-inflammatory, anti-thrombosis, and 
anti-diabetic agent. In this study, the effects of NAM and MNAM on metabolic and 
endocrine abnormalities were evaluated in the adipose and ovarian tissues of a 
letrozole-induced rat model of PCOS. Our results showed that MNAM and NAM 
reversed abnormal estrous cycle and reduced the serum testosterone levels and 
CYP17A1 gene expression. Furthermore, all therapeutic factors improved HOMA-IR 
after treatment and NAM significantly increased the expression of GLUT4 and 
decreased the gene expression of visfatin. Also, MNAM diminished the gene 
expression of visfatin and resistin. It is noteworthy that all the therapeutic 
factors successfully activated the AMPK. In summary, this study is the first 
study reported beneficial effects of NAM and MNAM on the treatment of PCOS. 
Additionally, the alleviative effects of our therapeutic factors may be 
partially mediated by the AMPK-dependent manner due to the contribution of the 
AMPK in the expression of CYP17A1, visfatin, resistin, and GLUT4. Although more 
studies are required to unravel the exact mode of actions of MNAM and NAM in the 
PCOS, the findings of the current study shed light on an urgent need for 
discovering novel therapeutic pharmaceuticals regarding the treatment of PCOS.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2020.109093
PMID: 32298659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
