1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Aug;100(10):3841-3849. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10421. Epub
2020  May 8.

Structural dependence of antidiabetic effect of steviol glycosides and their 
metabolites on streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice.

Myint KZ(1)(2), Chen JM(1), Zhou ZY(1)(2), Xia YM(1)(2), Lin J(3), Zhang J(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 
Wuxi, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Synthetic and Biological Colloids (Ministry of Education), 
School of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine of Ministry of Health, Jiangsu Institute 
of Nuclear Medicine, Wuxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Stevia has been proposed as a potential antidiabetic sweetener, 
mainly based on inconsistent results from stevioside or the plant extract, yet 
lacking relative experimental evidence from individual steviol glycosides (SGs) 
and their metabolites.
RESULTS: The results systematically revealed that the typical SGs and their 
final metabolite (steviol) presented an antidiabetic effect on streptozotocin 
(STZ) diabetic mice in all assayed antidiabetic aspects. In general, the 
performance strength of the samples followed the sequence steviol > steviol 
glucosyl ester > steviolbioside > rubusoside > stevioside > rebaudioside A, 
which is opposite to their sweetness strength order, and generally in accordance 
with the glucosyl group numbers in their molecules. This may imply that the 
antidiabetic effect of the SGs might be achieved through steviol, which 
presented antidiabetic performance similar to that of metformin with a dose of 
1/20 that of metformin. Moreover, the 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose traced micro-PET 
experiment revealed that stevioside and steviol could increase the uptake of 
glucose in the myocardium and brain of the diabetic mice within 60 min, and 
decrease the accumulation of glucose in the liver and kidney.
CONCLUSIONS: The SGs and steviol presented an antidiabetic effect on STZ 
diabetic mice in all assayed aspects, with an induction time to start the effect 
of the SGs. Stevioside and steviol could increase uptake of glucose in the 
myocardium and brain of the diabetic mice, and decrease accumulation of glucose 
in the liver and kidney. The performance strength of the SGs is generally in 
accordance with glucosyl group numbers in their molecules.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10421
PMID: 32297310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
