1. Can J Diabetes. 2020 Jul;44(5):407-413.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2020.01.009.
Epub  2020 Jan 28.

Type 2 Diabetes in Older Adults in Long-Term Care Homes: An Educational 
Intervention to Improve Diabetes Care.

Lega IC(1), Kapur A(2), Leung F(3), Zahedi A(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: iliana.lega@wchospital.ca.
(2)Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Scarborough and Rouge Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Over 25% of nursing home residents have diabetes. Nurses (registered 
nurses and registered practical nurses), registered dietitians and personal 
support workers (PSWs) provide the bulk of diabetes care in long-term care (LTC) 
homes, but their self-rated diabetes knowledge is poor. In this study, we 
evaluated the impact of an educational intervention on comfort with, and 
knowledge of, diabetes management among frontline LTC staff.
METHODS: We implemented an educational intervention in 2 LTC homes in Ontario 
that targeted nurses and dietitians, PSWs and physicians. A self-assessment 
questionnaire and a knowledge test were administered to nurses and dietitians 
and PSWs before and after the intervention. We also measured pre- and 
postintervention glycated hemoglobin levels, use of sliding scale insulin and 
type and dose of diabetes medications prescribed.
RESULTS: After the intervention, both the nurses and dietitians and PSWs groups 
demonstrated increased comfort with diabetes management and improved 
self-appraised knowledge. Among PSWs, knowledge of foot care improved the most, 
and the nurses and dietitians group had the greatest improvement in knowledge of 
blood glucose monitoring. In addition, there was reduced use of sliding scale 
insulin, and in the number of residents requiring renal-based dose reductions of 
glucose-lowering medications. This intervention was innovative as it targeted 
different LTC health-care providers; it demonstrated the potential to increase 
LTC health-care providers' confidence in diabetes management. Future studies 
could assess the clinical benefits of an educational intervention on rates of 
hypoglycemia and improving A1C targets.
CONCLUSIONS: An educational intervention can improve knowledge and comfort of 
diabetes management of frontline LTC staff.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2020.01.009
PMID: 32305292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
