1. TEK-Related Venous Malformations.

Seront E(1), Boon LM(2), Vikkula M(3).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2008 Sep 18 [updated 2023 Mar 2].

Author information:
(1)Institut Roi Albert II, Department of Medical Oncology, Cliniques 
universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
(2)Center for Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques 
universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
(3)Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de 
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: TEK-related venous malformations (VM) encompass a 
range of phenotypes. Following the International Society for the Study of 
Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA) classification, these include common VM 
(unifocal/isolated VM or multifocal sporadic VM [MSVM]), multiple cutaneous and 
mucosal VM (VMCM), and blue rubber bleb nevus (BRBN) syndrome. VM are usually 
present at birth and grow with time, and new lesions can appear over time in 
individuals with MSVM, VMCM, and BRBN syndrome. Small lesions are usually 
asymptomatic; larger lesions can extend into other tissues, including 
subcutaneous tissues and muscles, causing pain and functional limitations. 
Malignant transformation has not been reported in TEK-related VM to date.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TEK-related VM is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and either a heterozygous germline gain-of-function 
pathogenic variant (VMCM) or a somatic (mosaic) gain-of-function pathogenic 
variant (unifocal VM, MSVM, BRBN syndrome) identified by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Sclerotherapy, alone or in combination 
with plastic and reconstructive surgery, depending on the size and location of 
the lesions. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) should be administered prior to 
any invasive procedure (sclerotherapy and/or surgery) to avoid disseminated 
intravascular coagulopathy. If D-dimers are elevated and fibrinogen levels are 
low, LMWH should be initiated one to two weeks before surgery, depending on 
severity of coagulation abnormality, and continued for two weeks after surgery. 
If fibrinogen levels are normal, LMWH can be initiated the day before surgery. 
If lesions are painful and D-dimers are elevated, LMWH can also be used to treat 
the associated pain. For gastrointestinal VM, endoscopic evaluations with 
abdominal imaging are needed. Sirolimus has been recently used with some success 
in individuals with TEK-related VM who do not respond to or are ineligible for 
surgery or sclerotherapy, and has been shown to reduce pain and functional 
complications. Surveillance: Clinical reevaluation of TEK-related VM lesions 
annually and if symptoms arise. D-dimer levels should be measured every five 
years, if lesions become painful, and before any surgical and/or 
sclerotherapeutic procedure. Individuals on sirolimus should be closely followed 
at the beginning and throughout the course of their treatment, in order to 
modify the dosage as well as manage adverse events. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Contraceptive pills with high estrogen concentration. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Physical examination of at-risk neonates to identify those 
who can benefit from early treatment. Pregnancy management: D-dimer levels 
should be evaluated every one to three months during pregnancy (depending on the 
symptoms) and prior to delivery to adjust LMWH therapy and to avoid abnormal 
bleeding during delivery.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TEK-related VM are either inherited in an autosomal dominant 
fashion (TEK-related VMCM) or caused by somatic (mosaic) variants (TEK-related 
unifocal VM, MSVM, and BRBN syndrome). For TEK-related VMCM, most individuals 
have an affected parent. The proportion of cases caused by a de novo pathogenic 
variant is unknown; none have been reported to date. In some affected 
individuals, lesions are small. Therefore, careful skin examination is needed in 
order to determine if a family member is affected. Each child of an individual 
with TEK-related VMCM has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk is possible if the TEK 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member. With 
regards to other TEK-related phenotypes, unifocal VM, MSVM, and BRBN syndrome 
are not known to be inherited, as identified pathogenic variants to date are 
somatic (mosaic). No confirmed vertical transmission or sib recurrence has been 
reported to date. The risk to sibs of a proband with somatic mosaicism for a 
pathogenic variant in TEK would be expected to be the same as in the general 
population. Due to mosaicism, the risk for transmission to offspring is expected 
to be less than 50%.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301733
