1. PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum.

Mirzaa G(1), Graham JM Jr(2), Keppler-Noreuil K(3).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2023.
2013 Aug 15 [updated 2023 Apr 6].

Author information:
(1)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(2)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California
(3)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 
Wisconsin

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) encompasses 
a range of clinical findings in which the core features are congenital or 
early-childhood onset of segmental/focal overgrowth with or without cellular 
dysplasia. Prior to the identification of PIK3CA as the causative gene, PROS was 
separated into distinct clinical syndromes based on the tissues and/or organs 
involved (e.g., MCAP [megalencephaly-capillary malformation] syndrome and CLOVES 
[congenital lipomatous asymmetric overgrowth of the trunk, lymphatic, capillary, 
venous, and combined-type vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, skeletal and 
spinal anomalies] syndrome). The predominant areas of overgrowth include the 
brain, limbs (including fingers and toes), trunk (including abdomen and chest), 
and face, all usually in an asymmetric distribution. Generalized brain 
overgrowth may be accompanied by secondary overgrowth of specific brain 
structures resulting in ventriculomegaly, a markedly thick corpus callosum, and 
cerebellar tonsillar ectopia with crowding of the posterior fossa. Vascular 
malformations may include capillary, venous, and less frequently, arterial or 
mixed (capillary-lymphatic-venous or arteriovenous) malformations. Lymphatic 
malformations may be in various locations (internal and/or external) and can 
cause various clinical issues, including swelling, pain, and occasionally 
localized bleeding secondary to trauma. Lipomatous overgrowth may occur 
ipsilateral or contralateral to a vascular malformation, if present. The degree 
of intellectual disability appears to be mostly related to the presence and 
severity of seizures, cortical dysplasia (e.g., polymicrogyria), and 
hydrocephalus. Many children have feeding difficulties that are often 
multifactorial in nature. Endocrine issues affect a small number of individuals 
and most commonly include hypoglycemia (largely hypoinsulinemic hypoketotic 
hypoglycemia), hypothyroidism, and growth hormone deficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PROS is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous mosaic (or rarely, constitutional) 
activating pathogenic variant in PIK3CA. Sequence analysis of DNA derived from 
clinically affected tissue samples ‒ preferably from freshly obtained dermal 
biopsy overlying an affected area, from surgical excision of the overgrown 
tissue, or from uncultured tissues (such as skin fibroblasts or other tissues) ‒ 
should be prioritized for genetic testing. Targeted capture of the entire PIK3CA 
coding region followed by next-generation sequencing at very deep coverage is 
recommended for somatic variant detection, as it allows for detection of very 
low levels of mosaicism throughout the gene.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment – targeted therapy: Alpelisib (VIJOICE®) 50 mg orally with 
food once a day (at about the same time every day) for those between age two 
years and <18 years with PROS. In those age six years or older, the dose may be 
increased to 125 mg once a day after 24 weeks. A starting dose of 250 mg orally 
with food once a day (at about the same time every day) has been approved for 
those age ≥18 years. Alpelisib has been approved specifically for the reduction 
of overgrowth, vascular lesions, and other functional complications. To date, it 
is unknown whether this drug has any efficacy in treating the neurologic 
manifestations of PROS (as, e.g., in MCAP syndrome). Treatment – supportive 
care: Significant or lipomatous segmental overgrowth may require debulking; 
scoliosis and leg-length discrepancy may require orthopedic care and surgical 
intervention. Neurologic complications (e.g., obstructive hydrocephalus, 
increased intracranial pressure, progressive and/or symptomatic cerebellar 
tonsillar ectopia or Chiari malformation, and epilepsy in those with brain 
overgrowth/malformations) may warrant neurosurgical intervention. Depending on 
the type of vascular malformations, sclerotherapy, laser therapy, or oral 
medications such as sirolimus may be used. Similarly, lymphatic malformations 
may be treated through oral medications or careful surgical debulking, 
preferably by a vascular anomalies team. For those with pain, evaluation for the 
source of pain and treatment of the underlying cause is recommended. For those 
with growth hormone deficiency, evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
axis is warranted; a trial of growth hormone therapy may be considered with 
careful monitoring of linear growth and overgrowth. Severe persistent 
hypoglycemia has been reported, and requires evaluation and ongoing treatment, 
which can include cornstarch administration. Routine treatment of the following, 
when present, is indicated: cardiac and renal abnormalities; intellectual 
disabilities and behavior issues; polydactyly and foot deformities; coagulopathy 
or thrombosis; Wilms tumor; and hypothyroidism. Surveillance: At each visit: 
measurement of growth parameters including head circumference, length of arms, 
hands, legs, and feet; assess for new neurologic manifestations (seizures, 
changes in tone, and other signs/symptoms of Chiari malformation); monitor 
developmental progress and behavior; assess motor skills; clinical assessment 
for scoliosis and abdominal examination for organomegaly and/or abdominal 
masses. Serial head MRI imagining is recommended, with frequency based on the 
severity of findings on initial assessment and the degree of brain maturation. 
For those with CNS overgrowth or dysplasia, brain MRI every six months until age 
two years and then annually until age eight years to monitor specifically for 
progressive hydrocephalus and Chiari malformation. As clinically indicated: 
clinical assessment and monitoring of any vascular and/or lymphatic 
malformations; radiographs of the limbs in those with overgrowth of a limb or 
portion of a limb; ultrasound or MRI follow up in those with truncal overgrowth; 
spinal MRI in those with scoliosis or deformities that affect the spine; blood 
glucose monitoring and evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis for 
those with persistent hypoglycemia, particularly if they require ongoing 
treatment for hypoglycemia. Hematology consultation with recommendations for 
assessment for thrombosis and coagulopathy risk after any surgical intervention, 
particularly in those with the CLOVES phenotype and/or those with vascular 
malformations. Consideration of renal ultrasound every three months until age 
eight years (tumor screening for Wilms tumor is controversial).
GENETIC COUNSELING: PROS disorders are not known to be inherited, as most 
identified pathogenic variants are somatic (mosaic). No confirmed vertical 
transmission or sib recurrence has been reported to date. The risk to sibs of a 
proband with somatic mosaicism for a pathogenic variant in PIK3CA would be 
expected to be the same as in the general population. All but a few affected 
individuals with PROS have had somatic mosaicism for a PIK3CA pathogenic 
variant, suggesting that mutation occurred post fertilization in one cell of the 
multicellular embryo. Therefore, the risk for transmission to offspring is 
expected to be less than 50%.

Copyright © 1993-2023, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 23946963
