1. Lymphoproliferative Disorders.

Justiz Vaillant AA(1), Stang CM(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 14.

Author information:
(1)University of the West Indies
(2)Conway Med. Center/Campbell University

Lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) comprise a heterogeneous group of diseases 
characterized by uncontrolled production of lymphocytes that cause monoclonal 
lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy and bone marrow infiltration. These diseases 
often occur in immunocompromised individuals. There are two subsets of 
lymphocytes: T and B cells that regenerate uncontrollably to produce 
immunoproliferative disorders, which are prone to immunodeficiency, a 
dysfunctional immune system, and lymphocyte dysregulation. Several gene 
mutations have been described as causes of LPD that can be iatrogenic or 
acquired. The X-linked LPD is characterized by a mutation in the X chromosome 
that predisposes to natural killer cell LPD and T-cell LPD. Autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a type of LPD caused by a mutation in the 
gene that encodes for a Fas protein which is located in the long arm of 
chromosome 10. Males with X-linked immunodeficiency syndrome are susceptible to 
LPD and at risk for acquiring EBV and further development of lymphoma. 
Individuals with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID), Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, 
Chediak–Higashi syndrome and viral infections including HIV, are also prone to 
LPD. Others at risk include patients undergoing tissue transplantation and the 
use of immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporin, sirolimus, and tacrolimus. 
Invasive fungal infections have also been linked to this pathology. Chronic 
lymphoproliferative disorders are immuno-morphologically and clinically 
heterogeneous. Common features of these processes include various 
immunophenotypes (T, B, and NK cells) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase 
negativity. The B-cell lymphocytic disorders include B-cell chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia, B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma (including mantle 
cell lymphoma) in leukemic phase, hairy cell leukemia and splenic lymphoma with 
villous lymphocytes. The T-cell chronic lymphoproliferative disorders include 
Sezary syndrome, T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma, 
and large granulated lymphocyte leukemia.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30725847

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Angel Justiz Vaillant declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: 
Christopher Stang declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible 
companies.
