1. Percutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty and Balloon Catheters.

Majeed H(1), Chowdhury YS(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 
Jan–.
2022 Sep 14.

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Elmhurst Hospital
(2)State University of New York - Downstate

Worldwide, atherosclerosis is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality 
manifesting as cardiovascular disease, carotid artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, and renal artery stenosis. Angioplasty is a minimally invasive 
endovascular procedure to widen these stenosed arteries. Angioplasty procedures 
are mainly directed against atherosclerotic plaque to mold and remodel the 
plaque and subsequently (derived from the Greek terms aging- vessel and 
plasso-mold). Recent advances in interventional radiology have made it possible 
to potentially treat almost all anatomic lesions with endovascular means, since 
its inception in 1964, when Dr.Charles Dotter percutaneously dilated localized 
stenosis of the subsartorial artery in an 82-year-old female with a guidewire 
and coaxial Teflon catheter, the tools, and techniques of angioplasty have 
greatly evolved from simple angioplasty with balloon dilation to stent placement 
and atherectomy procedures.  Some of the types of stents used are: 1. Coronary 
angioplasty: Bare metal stent. Drug-eluting stent. Early generation drug-eluting 
stents: Sirolimus-eluting stent and Paclitaxel-eluting stent. Durable polymer 
drug-eluting stents: Everolimus-eluting stent, Zotarolimus eluting stent, 
Ridaforolimus-eluting stent. Bioabsorbable polymer drug-eluting stents. 
Thin-strut bioabsorbable polymer DES. Ultra-thin strut DES: Orsiro stent. 
Polymer free DES. Others: Combo stent - sirolimus elution from biodegradable 
polymer matrix which is abluminal in shape with a CD34 antibody layer. The 
choice of stent depends on local availability and interventional cardiologist's 
expertise - Everolimus-eluting stents, Zotarolimus-eluting stent, 
ridaforolimus-eluting stents, and the biodegradable stent are usually the first 
choice. A bare-metal stent is preferred in cases where the patient is actively 
bleeding, or the duration of dual antiplatelet therapy cannot be >30 days e.g., 
non-cardiac surgery within 4-6 weeks of PCI. 2. Carotid angioplasty: Self 
Expanding Stents. Cobalto alloy braided mesh stent. Nitinol open-cell stents 
(cylindrical or tapered). Nitinol closed-cell stents. Hybrid nitinol stent. New 
Hybrid Carotid Stent. There is no clear guideline on which stent is ideal; there 
is a trend towards a tailored approach where the choice of stent and procedure 
is made based on individual carotid anatomy, plaque complexity, 
anatomopathological variables, and local availability and technical expertise. 
3. Peripheral arteries: Balloon-expandable stents. Self-expandable stents. 
Covered stents. Drug-eluting stents. Drug coated balloon stent. Dual therapy 
stents. Bioabsorbable vascular scaffold. Bioengineered stent. The choice of an 
appropriate stent depends on the access site, lesion location, stent 
availability, plaque complexity, and vascular anatomy evaluation, and expertise 
of the operator. Angioplasty is sometimes combined with atherectomy procedures 
to remove the plaque using specialized devices. Types of atherectomy procedures 
are Mechanical: Directional, Rotational, or Orbital devices or Laser evaporative 
methods that require the use of costly disposable devices. Evidence regarding 
their efficacy is lacking, and their use is still under investigation in 
specific niche indications.

Copyright © 2023, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33351412

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Hafsa Majeed declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Yuvraj Chowdhury 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
