1. J Vasc Access. 2023 Mar;24(2):289-299. doi: 10.1177/11297298211020867. Epub
2021  Jul 3.

Intervention with selution SLR™ Agent Balloon for Endovascular Latent Limus 
therapy for failing AV Fistulas (ISABELLA) Trial: Protocol for a pilot clinical 
study and pre-clinical results.

Tang TY(1)(2), Chong TT(1), Yap CJQ(1), Soon SXY(1), Chan SL(3), Tan RY(4), Yap 
HY(1), Tay HT(1), Tan CS(3), Barnhill S(5), Hellinga D(6), DeGraw RT(7), Finn 
AV(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(2)Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Health Services Research Center, SingHealth, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Renal Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(5)American Preclinical Services LLC, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Medstar Health Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Bioanalytical Services Inc., West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(8)CVPath Institute Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(9)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this pilot clinical study is to evaluate the safety and 
efficacy of the Selution Sustained Limus Release (SLR)™ sirolimus-coated balloon 
(M.A. MedAlliance SA, Nyon, Switzerland) for improving the patency of failing 
arterio-venous fistulas (AVF) in hemodialysis patients. We also present herein a 
pre-clinical pharmacokinetic and safety evaluation of Selution™ to justify its 
first use in hemodialysis patients for endovascular access salvage.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This is an investigator-initiated prospective 
single-center, non-blinded single-arm trial. Forty patients with clinically 
significant de novo or recurrent stenoses in a mature AVF circuit will be 
recruited. All stenotic lesions will be prepared with high pressure 
non-compliant conventional balloon angioplasty (CBA) prior to deployment of the 
Sustained-Release Selution™ sirolimus drug-eluting balloon. The primary efficacy 
endpoint is 6-month target lesion primary patency and the primary safety 
endpoint is freedom from localized or systemic serious adverse events through 30 
days. Secondary endpoints of interest include technical and clinical success 
rates and circuit access patency at 3 and 6 months. Follow-up will occur for 2 
years for those patients whose AVFs remain patent. Pharmacokinetic and 
histological animal safety studies performed with the Selution™ coating 
formulation showed prolonged arterial tissue retention of sirolimus with 
therapeutic levels up to 60 days and non-toxic and rapidly declining blood 
levels. Histological results in animal models demonstrated safety, freedom from 
intraluminal thrombus, reduction in restenosis by sirolimus elution compared to 
CBA, and no evidence of embolic phenomena indicative of adverse particulate 
effects.
DISCUSSION: Long release sirolimus coated balloons may serve as a promising 
novel alternative therapy to paclitaxel-based technology for treating conduit 
stenosis secondary to neointimal hyperplasia. Pre-clinical pharmacokinetic and 
histological animal data are encouraging and provide suggestion of safety and 
efficacy in this setting. This single-center trial will provide a first step 
toward demonstration of efficacy and safety of this device for treatment of 
stenotic fistulas.

DOI: 10.1177/11297298211020867
PMCID: PMC10021111
PMID: 34219511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: TYT and TTC have received physician-initiated study 
grants from M.A. MedAlliance SA.
