1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2023 Apr;44(2):175-181. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1961281. 
Epub 2021 Aug 6.

Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome associated with chorioretinopathy and nyctalopia: a case 
report and review of the literature.

Konstantinou EK(1)(2), Shaikh N(1)(3), Ramsey DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Lahey Hospital & Medical Center, Beth Israel 
Lahey Health, Peabody, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: To report a rare case of Birt-Hogg-Dubé Syndrome (BHD) with progressive 
chorioretinopathy.
METHODS: Case report.
RESULTS: A 55-year-old woman presented with longstanding nyctalopia attributed 
to a congenital retinal dystrophy, but no prior genetic testing. Her posterior 
pole examination demonstrated retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) mottling with 
extensive macular drusen and paracentral chorioretinal atrophy, consistent with 
a fleck retinopathy. Her past medical history was remarkable for nephrectomy for 
unilateral renal malignancy, parotid tumors and thyroid nodules. Dark adaptation 
time was prolonged, and electroretinography (ERG) revealed abnormal waveforms 
with depressed amplitudes. Genetic testing confirmed a deletion mutation in the 
folliculin (FLCN) gene and was negative for other relevant mutations, including 
EFEMP1 responsible for autosomal dominant macular and peripapillary drusen in 
Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy and TIMP3 responsible for Sorsby Fundus 
Dystrophy.
CONCLUSION: BHD is a rare autosomal-dominant disorder with multi-systemic 
clinical manifestations caused by a mutation in the FLCN gene. Affected 
individuals are prone to renal and pulmonary cysts, renal cancer, and 
fibrofolliculomas. Reports on ocular manifestations of BHD include eyelid 
fibrofolliculomas, flecked chorioretinopathy, choroidal melanoma, choroidal 
melanoma with sector melanocytosis, and retinal pigment epithelial 
micro-detachments. In this case of BHD, we note a fleck retinopathy with 
bilateral chorioretinal atrophy, displaying a phenotype of extensive 
chorioretinopathy associated with impaired dark adaptation and ERG 
abnormalities.
ABBREVIATIONS: BHD: Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome; FLCN: Folliculin. RPE: retinal 
pigment epithelium; OD: Oculus dexter (right eye); OS: Oculus sinister (left 
eye). OU: Oculus uterque (both eyes); ERG: electroretinogram; mfERG: multifocal 
electroretinography. ffERG: full-field electroretinography; FAF: fundus 
autofluorescence; OCT: optical coherence tomography; FA: fluorescein 
angiography; DA: dark-adapted; LA: light-adapted; mTOR: mammalian target of 
rapamycin; EFEMP1: epithelial growth factor-containing fibulin-like 
extracellular matrix protein 1; VPS13B: Vacuolar Protein Sorting 13 Homolog B; 
AGBL5: AATP/GTP-Binding Protein Like 5; ALMS1: Alstrom Syndrome 1; COL1BA1: 
Collagen Type I Beta, Alpha Chain 1; PDE6A: Rod Phosphodiesterase 6-alpha; 
USH2A: Usherin 2a; VCAN: Versican; RP: Retinitis pigmentosa; AR: Autosomal 
recessive.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1961281
PMID: 34353225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
