1. Exp Clin Transplant. 2023 Jan;21(1):76-79. doi: 10.6002/ect.2021.0100. Epub
2022  Jan 3.

Complete Recovery After Immunosuppressive Treatment Change in a Patient With 
Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorder.

Arı D(1), Turan D, Gökcan H, Özdemir M, Akdoğan Kayhan M.

Author information:
(1)From the Ankara City Hospital, Department of Gastroenterology, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Posttransplant lymphoproliferative diseases are a rare but important cause of 
morbidity and mortality secondary to immunosuppression after solid-organ or bone 
marrow transplant. Generally, posttransplant lymphoproliferative diseases 
develop in the first 2 years after transplant, when immunosuppressive therapy is 
the most intense. Change or reduction in immunosup - pressive treatment is an 
option for treatment of posttransplant lymphoproliferative diseases. We 
evaluated the treatment of a patient with posttransplant lymphoproliferative 
disease after liver transplant. A 64-year-old man underwent liver transplant 
from a living donor (the patient's son) in 2011 to treat hepatocellular cancer 
secondary to chronic hepatitis B. Tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil were used 
for immunosuppression through 9 years after liver transplant. In the abdominal 
computed tomography performed in response to abdominal pain during follow-up in 
March 2019, multiple solid lesions were observed. A liver biopsy revealed 
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. 
Fluorine-18 positron emission tomography/computed tomography imaging of the 
patient showed no pathology in favor of primary lymphoproliferative disease. 
Mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus treatment was changed to everolimus. In the 
follow-up dynamic magnetic resonance imaging examination that was performed at 3 
months after treatment change, we observed that the lesion at liver segment 6 
had regressed to 30 mm and several lesions with similar features were observed 
in the right lobe of the liver. Additional liver biopsy results were compatible 
with complete remission. The patient's clinical symptoms had fully regressed at 
18 months after the diagnosis of PTLD, at the time of this writing. Ongoing 
radiological and clinical follow-up has shown complete remission. Change from 
calcineurin treatment to treatment with an inhibitor of the mechanistic target 
of rapamycin may be an essential and new option for treatment of posttransplant 
lymphoproliferative disease after liver transplant.

DOI: 10.6002/ect.2021.0100
PMID: 34981706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
