1. Mod Rheumatol Case Rep. 2023 Jan 3;7(1):47-51. doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxac033.

A mechanistic target of rapamycin inhibitor, everolimus safely ameliorated lupus 
nephritis in a patient complicated with tuberous sclerosis.

Okita Y(1)(2), Yoshimura M(1), Katada Y(1)(3), Saeki Y(1)(4), Ohshima S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Allergology, NHO Osaka Minami Medical Center, 
Kawachinagano, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Rheumatology, Suita Municipal 
Hospital, Suita, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, NHO Osaka Minami Medical Center, 
Kawachinagano, Japan.

A 26-year-old woman with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) received outpatient 
treatment for the complication of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) at our 
hospital. She visited our hospital with a chief complaint of pitting oedema in 
bilateral lower legs for 3 days. The urinalysis showed massive proteinuria with 
a lot of white blood cell casts. The blood tests revealed hypoalbuminaemia, 
hypercholesterolaemia, hypocomplementaemia, and elevated anti-double-stranded 
DNA antibody titre. Renal biopsy was not performed because of multiple renal 
angiomyolipomas, which was one of the features of TSC. She was diagnosed with a 
nephrotic state due to lupus nephritis. Although she had a standard therapy with 
high-dose corticosteroid and mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus, complete 
remission had not been achieved leading to a steroid-dependent nephrotic 
syndrome. During the follow-up, the angiomyolipomas became larger and had a risk 
of rupture at the age of 29 years. Everolimus, a mechanistic target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) inhibitor, was started for the treatment of angiomyolipomas, and 
mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus were terminated instead. The activity of 
lupus nephritis was surprisingly ameliorated, and the amount of corticosteroid 
successfully tapered. Everolimus has been continued for 6 years without severe 
side effects. Accumulating evidence suggests that the activated mTOR pathway 
plays a key role in the pathogenesis of SLE. We reported the long-term efficacy 
and safety of everolimus for refractory SLE in a patient with TSC for the first 
time. This case suggests that everolimus can be a promising option for the 
treatment of lupus nephritis.

© Japan College of Rheumatology 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All 
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mrcr/rxac033
PMID: 35512453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
