1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1999 Aug;17(3):S15-21.

The renaissance of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs.

van Zwieten PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Classic centrally acting antihypertensive drugs such as clonidine, guanfacine 
and alpha-methyl-dioxyphenylalanine (alpha-methyl-DOPA) (via its active 
metabolite alpha-methyl-noradrenaline) are assumed to induce peripheral 
sympathoinhibition and a reduction in (elevated) blood pressure as a result of 
the stimulation of alpha2-adrenoceptors in the pons-medulla region in the brain. 
Their antihypertensive efficacy is beyond doubt, but their profile of adverse 
reactions is considered unfavourable when compared with most other 
antihypertensive drugs currently used, such as low-dose diuretics, 
beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACE)-inhibitors, calcium 
antagonists, peripheral alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists, and angiotensin 
II-receptor antagonists. More recently, central imidazoline (I1)-receptors have 
been recognized to be another target of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs. 
Clonidine is considered at present to be a mixed agonist that stimulates both 
alpha2- and I1-receptors. Moxonidine and rilmenidine are considered to be 
moderately selective I1-receptor stimulants, although it still remains unknown 
whether these agents act directly on the receptor as genuine agonists. The 
imidazoline (I1)-agonists also cause peripheral sympathoinhibition, triggered at 
the level of central nervous imidazoline receptors, predominantly in the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla. The imidazoline receptor stimulants are effective 
antihypertensives with a mode of action and haemodynamic profile which seems 
attractive from a pathophysiological point of view. Moxonidine and rilmenidine 
are considered preferable over the classic alpha2-adrenoceptor stimulants 
because of their pattern of side-effects, which may be explained on the basis of 
absent or weak affinity for the alpha2-adrenoceptor.

PMID: 10489094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
