1. Aust N Z J Med. 1999 Jun;29(3):418-27. doi:
10.1111/j.1445-5994.1999.tb00737.x.

Sympathetic activation and the role of beta-blockers in chronic heart failure.

Krum H(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Monash University, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Vic.

Chronic heart failure (CHF) is associated with activation of the sympathetic 
nervous system. This activation provides short term haemodynamic support to the 
failing myocardium, but may be deleterious over longer periods as chronic 
catecholamine excess appears to contribute to disease progression and increased 
mortality in this condition. Therefore, blockade of sympathetic activation 
represents a logical, if somewhat counter-intuitive, approach to the management 
of the patient with systolic CHF. Pharmacological approaches to blockade of this 
system include inhibition of central sympathetic outflow (using central 
sympatholytics, e.g. rilmenidine, moxonidine), blockade of the catecholamine 
biosynthetic pathway (dopamine beta hydroxylase antagonists) and blockade of the 
cardiac effects of sympathetic activation (beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents). 
Beta-blockers have now been extensively studied in patients with symptomatic CHF 
of the New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II and III severity. Provided 
beta-blocker therapy is carefully up-titrated from sub-therapeutic doses and 
given for at least three to four months, these agents have been associated with 
favourable long term haemodynamic, functional and mortality outcomes. 
Furthermore, beta-blockers delay disease progression in CHF by reversing the 
pathological myocardial remodelling process that accompanies the disease. 
Non-selective beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs appear to be of particular 
benefit in CHF therapy. Myocardial beta2 receptors are down-regulated to a 
lesser extent than beta1 receptors in CHF, therefore blockade of the beta2 
receptor sub-type may assume greater importance in inhibiting the deleterious 
effects of sympathetic activation on the myocardium in this disease. Newer 
agents that possess additional vasodilator properties (carvedilol, bucindolol, 
nebivolol) may be useful in overcoming the initial negative inotropy of the 
beta-blocking component of the drug, however, it is unlikely that vasodilation 
contributes greatly to long term clinical benefits. Drugs such as carvedilol are 
also anti-oxidant, anti-proliferative and have anti-endothelin actions; the 
clinical significance of these properties is yet to be determined. Unanswered 
questions remain regarding the use of beta-blockers in heart failure. Ongoing 
studies are further examining mechanisms underlying the clinical benefits of 
these agents as well as their therapeutic potential in NYHA Class IV patients, 
heart failure post-myocardial infarction and patients with asymptomatic left 
ventricular dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.1999.tb00737.x
PMID: 10868514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
