1. Am J Hypertens. 2000 Jun;13(6 Pt 2):99S-105S. doi: 
10.1016/s0895-7061(00)00225-9.

The sympathetic system and hypertension.

Esler M(1).

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, Melbourne, Australia. 
esler@baker.edu.au

Measurement of regional sympathetic activity in lean essential hypertension 
patients using electrophysiologic (sympathetic nerve recording) and 
neurochemical (measurement of norepinephrine spillover) techniques demonstrates 
activation of sympathetic outflow to the heart, kidneys, and skeletal muscle 
vasculature in younger (< 45 years) patients. The increase in sympathetic 
activity is a mechanism for both initiating and sustaining the blood pressure 
elevation. Sympathetic nervous activation also confers specific cardiovascular 
risk. Stimulation of the sympathetic nerves to the heart promotes the 
development of left ventricular hypertrophy and contributes to the genesis of 
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death. Sympathetically mediated 
vasoconstriction in skeletal muscle vascular beds reduces the uptake of glucose 
by muscle, and is thus a basis for insulin resistance and consequent 
hyperinsulinemia. Understanding the neural pathophysiology of obesity-related 
hypertension has been more difficult. In normotensive obesity, renal sympathetic 
tone is doubled, but cardiac norepinephrine spillover (a measure of sympathetic 
activity in the heart) is only 50% of normal. In obesity-related hypertension, 
there is a comparable elevation of renal norepinephrine spillover, but without 
suppression of cardiac sympathetics, as here cardiac norepinephrine spillover is 
more than double that of normotensive obese and 25% higher than in healthy 
volunteers. Increased renal sympathetic activity in obesity may be a necessary 
cause for the development of hypertension (predisposing to hypertension 
development), but apparently is not a sufficient cause. The discriminating 
feature of the obese who develop hypertension is the absence of the presumably 
adaptive suppression of cardiac sympathetic outflow seen in the normotensive 
obese. The sympathetic nervous system has moved towards center stage in 
cardiovascular medicine. The importance of sympathetic activation in heart 
failure progression and mortality and in the generation of ventricular 
arrhythmias is now well established. In essential hypertension also, although 
the mechanism differs somewhat between the lean and obese, the sympathetic 
nervous system is a key factor in the genesis of the disorder, and additionally 
promotes the development of complications. Through their central inhibition of 
sympathetic nervous activity, I1 agents such as rilmenidine powerfully reduce 
sympathetic nervous activity in essential hypertension patients, lowering blood 
pressure, and carrying the potential for specific cardiovascular protection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0895-7061(00)00225-9
PMID: 10921528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
