1. Am J Hypertens. 2000 Jun;13(6 Pt 2):84S-88S. doi:
10.1016/s0895-7061(00)00223-5.

Identification and characterization of I1 imidazoline receptors: their role in 
blood pressure regulation.

Bousquet P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire, Université 
Louis Pasteur, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

It has been shown that only imidazolines and related compounds cause a fall in 
blood pressure when administered at the site of the hypotensive action of 
clonidine; no phenylethylamine compounds were capable of producing such an 
effect at this site. Extensive biochemical and pharmacologic studies have 
confirmed the involvement of imidazoline receptors in the regulation of 
vasomotor tone and in the mechanism of action of some centrally acting 
antihypertensive drugs. Imidazoline-specific binding sites (IBS) did not bind 
catecholamines. Functional studies using selective antagonists have confirmed 
that the hypotensive effects of clonidine-like drugs are mediated by 
imidazoline-specific receptors, whereas their sedative action clearly involves 
alpha2-adrenergic receptors located in the locus coeruleus. Compared with 
clonidine, second-generation centrally acting antihypertensive drugs such as 
rilmenidine have been shown to be more selective for imidazoline receptors than 
for alpha2-adrenergic receptors. This selectivity may explain the reduced 
incidence of side effects of these drugs at hypotensive doses. Very recently, 
new imidazoline-like compounds have been synthesized that are highly selective 
for both subtypes of IBS (I1 and I2). Some of these compounds lowered blood 
pressure when injected centrally in animals, indicating that an action on 
imidazoline I1 receptors alone is sufficient to lower blood pressure. With the 
help of such selective tools, we have also shown that imidazoline receptors and 
alpha2-adrenoceptors might cooperate to control vasomotor tone, and might 
jointly be involved in the hypotensive action of centrally acting hybrid drugs 
(ie, drugs that bind to both types of receptor).

DOI: 10.1016/s0895-7061(00)00223-5
PMID: 10921526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
