1. Hypertension. 2000 Sep;36(3):405-10. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.36.3.405.

Species-specific pharmacological properties of human alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors.

Molderings GJ(1), Bönisch H, Brüss M, Likungu J, Göthert M.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
molderings@uni-bonn.de

On the basis of data obtained in rabbits, the imidazoline receptor ligand 
rilmenidine has been suggested to decrease blood pressure in humans by 
activating central alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors. A prerequisite for this hypothesis 
was the unproved assumption that rabbit and human alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors are 
equally activated by rilmenidine. Because alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors in the brain 
and on cardiovascular sympathetic nerve terminals are identical, the latter were 
used as a model for the former to confirm or disprove this assumption. Human 
atrial appendages and rabbit pulmonary arteries were used to determine the 
potencies of alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonists in inhibiting the electrically (2 
Hz) evoked [(3)H]norepinephrine release and of antagonists in counteracting the 
alpha(2)-adrenoceptor-mediated inhibition induced by moxonidine. In the rabbit 
pulmonary artery, rilmenidine and oxymetazoline are potent full agonists, 
whereas in the human atrial appendages they are antagonists at the 
alpha(2)-autoreceptors, sharing this property with rauwolscine, phentolamine, 
and idazoxan. In contrast, prazosin is ineffective. In addition, a partial 
nucleotide and amino acid sequence of the rabbit alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor (a 
region known to substantially influence the pharmacological characteristics of 
the alpha(2)-adrenoceptor) revealed marked differences between the rabbit and 
the human alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor. The sympathetic nerves of both the human 
atrial appendages and rabbit pulmonary artery are endowed with 
alpha(2A)-autoreceptors, at which, however, both rilmenidine and oxymetazoline 
exhibit different properties (antagonism and agonism, respectively). The 
antagonistic property of rilmenidine at human alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors indicates 
that in contrast to the suggestion based on rabbit data, the hypotensive 
property of the drug in humans is not due to activation of 
alpha(2A)-adrenoceptors but other, presumably I(1)-imidazoline receptors, are 
probably involved.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.36.3.405
PMID: 10988273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
