1. Drugs Aging. 2000 Aug;17(2):133-59. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200017020-00005.

I1 imidazoline agonists. General clinical pharmacology of imidazoline receptors: 
implications for the treatment of the elderly.

Prichard BN(1), Graham BR.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, University College London, England.

In recent years evidence has accumulated for the existence of central 
imidazoline (I1) receptors that influence blood pressure. While there is some 
controversy, it has been suggested that clonidine exerts its blood 
pressure-lowering effect mainly by activation of imidazoline I1 receptors in the 
rostral ventrolateral medulla, while its sedative effect is mediated by 
activation of central alpha2-receptors. Moxonidine and rilmenidine are 2 
imidazoline compounds with 30-fold greater specificity for I1 receptors than for 
alpha2-receptors. In comparison, clonidine displays a 4-fold specificity for I1 
receptors compared with alpha2 receptors. Moxonidine and rilmenidine lower blood 
pressure by reducing peripheral resistance. They reduce circulating 
catecholamine levels and moxonidine reportedly reduces sympathetic nerve 
activity in patients with hypertension. Moxonidine and rilmenidine modestly 
reduce elevated blood glucose levels and moxonidine has been reported to reduce 
insulin resistance in hypertensive patients with raised insulin resistance. 
Small reductions in plasma levels of total cholesterol, low density 
lipoprotein-cholesterol and triglycerides have been reported with rilmenidine. 
Both moxonidine and rilmenidine are well absorbed after oral administration and 
are eliminated unchanged by the kidneys. The elimination half-life (t(1/2)) of 
rilmenidine and moxonidine is 8 and 2 hours, respectively, but trough/peak 
plasma concentration ratios indicate that moxonidine can be administered once 
daily, suggesting possible CNS retention. As would be expected, t(1/2) values 
are increased in patients with reduced renal function, and in elderly 
individuals. Both drugs have been compared with established antihypertensive 
drugs from all the major groups. Studies, almost all of which were of a 
double-blind, parallel-group design, indicate that blood pressure control with 
moxonidine or rilmenidine is similar to that with established drugs, i.e. 
alpha-blocking drugs, calcium antagonists, ACE inhibitors, beta-blocking drugs 
and diuretic agents. There have been few studies conducted solely in elderly 
patients. However, evidence clearly suggests that the antihypertensive effect of 
the imidazoline compounds is not reduced in elderly patients. The overall 
adverse effect profile of moxonidine and rilmenidine compares reasonably with 
established agents. In accord with the receptor-binding studies, drowsiness and 
dry mouth are observed less often with these drugs than with other centrally 
acting drugs, although the symptoms occur more often than with placebo. An 
overshoot of blood pressure was seen when treatment with clonidine, but not 
moxonidine, was abruptly discontinued in conscious, spontaneously hypertensive 
rats. Clinical evidence of withdrawal reaction with moxonidine or rilmenidine is 
scant but caution should be observed pending more formal studies.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200017020-00005
PMID: 10984201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
