1. Cardiovasc J S Afr. 2000 Aug;11(4):225-229.

Renewed interest in centrally acting antihypertensive drugs.

van Zwieten PA.

Classic centrally acting drugs such as clonidine and alpha-methyldopa induce 
peripheral sympatho-inhibition via the stimulation of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors in 
the brainstem. From a haemodynamic point of view this appears to be a useful 
mechanism to lower elevated blood pressure in hypertensives. Although not known 
in full detail, a complex relationship exists between the sympathetic nervous 
system and hypertensive disease; sympathetic inhibition therefore appears to be 
a logical target of antihypertensive drug treatment. Numerous attempts have been 
made to improve the unfavourable side-effect profile of the centrally 
actingalpha(2)-adrenoceptor stimulants. None of these attempts were successful, 
since both the central antihypertensive activity and the major side-effects 
(sedation, dry mouth) are mediated by alpha(2)-adrenoceptors. A new approach in 
this field has been offered by the introduction of centrally acting 
antihypertensives which interact with central imidazoline (I(1))-receptors and 
thus cause peripheral sympatho-inhibition. As such they offer haemodynamic 
benefits similar to those of the classic alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonists. 
However, it is hoped that their side-effect profile will be more favourable 
because of their much weaker affinity for alpha(2)-adrenoceptors. Moxonidine and 
rilmenidine are the prototypes of centrally acting I(1)-receptor stimulants. The 
antihypertensive activity of these agents is caused by vasodilatation and a 
reduction of peripheral vascular resistance. Left ventricular end-diastolic and 
end-systolic volumes are reduced, whereas heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac 
output and pulmonary artery pressures are largely unchanged. Left ventricular 
hypertrophy (LVH) is reduced in the long term. Both drugs when applied in a 
once-daily dosage schedule appear to control hypertension in most patients. Both 
drugs have been compared with representative agents from the major classes of 
antihypertensives in controlled trials and have been found to be equally 
effective with respect to blood pressure control. The incidence and severity of 
side-effects is lower than for clonidine, in particular with respect to 
sedation. A rebound (withdrawal) phenomenon has so far not been reported for 
moxonidine and rilmenidine. In conclusion, I(1)-receptor stimulants appear to 
offer the potential to be developed as centrally acting agents with a better 
side-effect profile than the classic alpha(2)-adrenoceptor stimulants, but with 
similar haemodynamic properties.

PMID: 11447483
