1. Am J Hypertens. 2001 Nov;14(11 Pt 2):317S-321S. doi: 
10.1016/s0895-7061(01)02238-5.

I1 receptors, cardiovascular function, and metabolism.

Bousquet P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France. 
pascalbousquet@medecine.u-strasbg.fr

When injected into the medullary site of the hypotensive action of clonidine, 
imidazolines and related compounds decrease blood pressure (BP), whereas no 
phenylethylamine compounds were capable of producing such an effect at the same 
site. There is much biochemical and pharmacologic evidence to support the 
involvement of imidazoline receptors in the regulation of vasomotor tone as well 
as in the mechanism of action of some centrally acting antihypertensive drugs. 
Imidazoline-specific binding sites, which do not recognize catecholamines, have 
been described in various tissues. Functional studies using selective 
antagonists have confirmed that the hypotensive effects of clonidine-like drugs 
are mediated, at least in part, by nonadrenergic imidazoline-specific receptors, 
whereas their sedative action clearly involves alpha2-adrenergic receptors 
located in the locus coeruleus. Compared with clonidine, newer centrally acting 
antihypertensive drugs such as rilmenidine are more selective for imidazoline 
receptors than for alpha2-adrenergic receptors. This selectivity may explain the 
reduced incidence of side effects of these drugs at therapeutic doses. Very 
recently, imidazoline-like compounds with no affinity and no activity at 
alpha2-adrenergic receptors have become available. Some of these compounds 
lowered the BP when injected centrally, indicating that an action on imidazoline 
I1 receptors alone is sufficient to cause hypotension. Nevertheless, imidazoline 
receptors and alpha2-adrenoceptors cooperate in the control of the vasomotor 
tone and in the hypotensive action of centrally acting hybrid drugs (ie, drugs 
that bind to both types of receptor). Additional noncardiovascular effects of 
imidazoline-like drugs have also been described, such as insulin secretion 
stimulation and renal sodium reabsorption inhibition. These effects may account 
for the long-term benefits of imidazoline selective drugs, such as rilmenidine.

DOI: 10.1016/s0895-7061(01)02238-5
PMID: 11721890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
