1. Am J Hypertens. 2001 Nov;14(11 Pt 2):304S-309S. doi: 
10.1016/s0895-7061(01)02236-1.

Sympathetic nervous system and insulin resistance: from obesity to diabetes.

Esler M(1), Rumantir M, Wiesner G, Kaye D, Hastings J, Lambert G.

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. 
murray.esler@baker.edu.au

As the world faces an obesity "epidemic," the mechanisms by which overweight is 
translated into insulin resistance, hypertension, and diabetes need to be better 
understood. Although the processes of transition remain uncertain, overactivity 
of the sympathetic nervous system appears pivotal. In obesity, there is 
stimulation of sympathetic outflow to the kidneys, evident in increased rates of 
spillover of noradrenaline into the renal veins, and to skeletal muscle 
vasculature, demonstrated with microneurography. The cause is unclear, but 
possibly involves the stimulatory action of leptin released from adipose tissue, 
or from within the brain, for which there is recent evidence in human obesity. 
The high renal sympathetic tone contributes to hypertension development by 
stimulating renin secretion and through promoting renal tubular reabsorption of 
sodium. Neurally mediated skeletal muscle vasoconstriction reduces glucose 
delivery and uptake in muscle. Impairment of glucose uptake by skeletal muscle 
is a hallmark of insulin resistance syndromes. Pharmacologic sympathetic nervous 
suppression within the central nervous system with imidazoline receptor-binding 
agents such as rilmenidine is a logical therapeutic approach for lowering blood 
pressure (BP) in patients with essential hypertension, in whom sympathetic 
activity is often increased. In addition, drugs of this class appear to have the 
capacity to favorably modify insulin sensitivity, which has particular relevance 
in the treatment of hypertensive diabetic patients. In the hypertension 
accompanying maturity onset obesity, with recent recommendations from advisory 
bodies setting lower goal BP, and with these lower targets often being reached 
only with combinations of antihypertensive agents, it is advisable that all 
drugs used in combination therapy have a favorable or at least a neutral effect 
on insulin resistance.

DOI: 10.1016/s0895-7061(01)02236-1
PMID: 11721888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
