1. Am J Hypertens. 1992 Apr;5(4 Pt 2):47S-50S.

Imidazoline receptors. A new concept in central regulation of the arterial blood 
pressure.

Bousquet P(1), Feldman J, Tibirica E, Bricca G, Greney H, Dontenwill M, 
Stutzmann J, Belcourt A.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Clonidine-like antihypertensive substances bind to nonadrenergic imidazoline 
specific sites within the nucleus reticularis lateralis (NRL), their medullary 
privileged site of action. Rilmenidine, a new central antihypertensive agent, 
was tested in the anesthetized rabbit. For the same hypotensive effect, 
cumulative doses given intracisternally proved 50 times more active than of 
those given systemically. Idazoxan, an alpha 2-adrenergic antagonist 
structurally related to the imidazolines, given centrally as pretreatment proved 
more potent in preventing the hypotensive effects than the same molar dose of 
yohimbine. When injected within the NRL area of the anesthetized rabbit, 
rilmenidine, like clonidine, always exhibited a hypotensive effect. The 
influence of clonidine and rilmenidine upon the NRL noradrenergic neurons 
involved in the blood pressure regulation, and upon those of the locus coeruleus 
(LC) involved in the sedative effect was studied by differential voltammetry. It 
was observed that rilmenidine was two times more selective than clonidine in 
inhibiting the NRL, as opposed to LC, neuronal activity. In addition, binding 
experiments of tritiated clonidine to human cortical and NRL membrane 
preparations showed that rilmenidine, as compared to clonidine, has a two to 
three times higher selectivity for the imidazoline receptors. In conclusion, we 
are now able to discriminate between the mechanism of the hypotensive effect of 
imidazoline-like drugs and that of their sedative action. Rilmenidine is the 
first example of an hypotensive drug more selective for imidazolin preferring 
receptors than for classical alpha 2-adrenoceptors.

PMID: 1350728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
