1. Am J Hypertens. 1992 Apr;5(4 Pt 2):99S-105S. doi: 10.1093/ajh/5.4.99s.

Rilmenidine: a novel approach to first-line treatment of hypertension.

Laurent S(1), Safar M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, INSERM (U. 337), Broussais Hospital, Paris, 
France.

Rilmenidine (RIL) is a novel antihypertensive drug selectively acting at the 
sites of imidazoline receptors. Compared with diuretics, beta-blockers, Ca2+ 
antagonists and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, the four major groups 
recommended by the US Joint National Committee as first-line antihypertensive 
drugs, RIL appears to meet the same criteria of efficacy, safety, and 
acceptability. Rilmenidine dose-dependently decreases blood pressure (BP), 
acting as a vasodilator by decreasing vascular resistance through inhibition of 
the adrenergic nervous system, even while the BP changes due to standing and 
exercise. In comparison with placebo, RIL significantly decreased BP. In 
double-blind comparative trials versus first-line diuretics and beta-blockers, 
RIL normalized BP in approximately 60% patients, showing a similar efficacy to 
other drugs. In contrast with hydrochlorothiazide, RIL decreased total 
cholesterol and did not change plasma potassium levels. No tachyphylaxis was 
observed during long-term treatment. Central side effects, which have 
contributed to the limitation of the use of alpha 2-agonists as second- or 
third-line therapy for hypertension, were significantly less frequent with RIL 
than with clonidine or methyldopa. Indeed, the incidence of dry mouth and 
drowsiness during double-blind comparative trials versus clonidine and 
methyldopa was significantly lower with RIL. This absence of central 
side-effects was confirmed in double-blind comparative trials versus 
hydrochlorothiazide and atenolol. In contrast with clonidine, no sodium 
retention or weight gain were observed during chronic treatment with 
RIL.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/ajh/5.4.99s
PMID: 1350733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
