1. Am J Hypertens. 1992 Apr;5(4 Pt 2):91S-98S. doi: 10.1093/ajh/5.4.91s.

Distinctive features of rilmenidine possibly related to its selectivity for 
imidazoline receptors.

Harron DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutics and Pharmacology, Queen's University of Belfast, 
Northern Ireland.

Rilmenidine is an oxazoline derivative with antihypertensive activity which was 
developed to enhance the dissociation between the hypotensive and adverse effect 
profile of centrally acting agents. Experimental studies have indicated that 
rilmenidine is selective for both alpha 2-adrenoceptors (v alpha 1) and newly 
discovered nonadrenergic imidazoline receptors in the brain and in the 
periphery. In experimental studies, rilmenidine differs from clonidine in that 
it is more selective for imidazoline receptors than for alpha 2-adrenoceptors; 
at equihypotensive doses, rilmenidine causes less bradycardia and reduction in 
cardiac output, less sedation, and little or no antinociceptive action compared 
to clonidine. The hypotensive effects of rilmenidine are antagonised by idazoxan 
and yohimbine, but idazoxan (imidazoline structure) is six times more potent 
than yohimbine (a selective alpha 2-antagonist). In isolated renal proximal 
tubule cells, where imidazoline binding has also been shown, rilmenidine 
inhibits reabsorption of sodium. Clinical studies comparing 1 mg rilmenidine 
with placebo demonstrated significant reductions in blood pressure (BP) (61% 
rilmenidine v 23% placebo normalized to 160/90 mm Hg). The reduction in BP was 
not associated with classical alpha 2 side effects such as dry mouth or daytime 
drowsiness. Compared with clonidine (0.15 to 0.3 mg), equihypotensive doses of 
rilmenidine (1 to 2 mg) induced two to three times less dry mouth, daytime 
drowsiness, and constipation; no orthostatic hypotension was reported. 
Methyldopa (0.5 to 1 mg) v rilmenidine (1 to 2 mg) indicated a comparable 
reduction of BP with significantly less weakness, drowsiness, orthostatic 
dizziness, and dry mouth on rilmenidine; there was no evidence of the "clonidine 
withdrawal syndrome" on drug withdrawal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/ajh/5.4.91s
PMID: 1350732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
