1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2003 Oct;86(10):903-10.

Efficacy and safety of rilmenidine, a selective imidazoline I1 receptor binding 
ligand, in mild-to-moderate Thai hypertensive patients.

Buranakitjaroen P(1), Kittipawong P, Koanantakul B, Piamsomboon C, 
Prasassarakich N, Silaraks S, Sukonthasarn A, Tiyapant A; Rilmenidine Thai Study 
Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Rilmenidine is an antihypertensive agent that selectively binds to 
imidazoline I1 receptor located in the brainstem and kidney. It acts both 
centrally by reducing sympathetic overactivity and in the kidney by decreasing 
water and sodium overload. This dual action leads to the immediate and delayed 
control of blood pressure caused by this drug.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of 
rilmenidine as monotherapy in mild-to-moderate essential hypertensive patients.
METHOD: An 8-week, open-labeled, multicenter study was conducted in Thai 
patients with mild-to-moderate essential hypertension. Rilmenidine 1 mg/day was 
given for 8 weeks. The dose could be titrated up to 2 mg/day according to the 
patient's blood pressure response at week 4. The primary efficacy parameters 
were the mean reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The 
proportions of patients whose blood pressure normalized or responded were 
evaluated as secondary efficacy parameters. Safety parameters were assessed by 
the changes in heart rate and reported side effects during the treatment period.
RESULTS: 103 subjects (44.7% men) with a mean age of 53 +/- 9.7 years completed 
the 8-week follow-up. At baseline, 46.6 per cent and 53.4 per cent of the 
patients were classified with mild and moderate hypertension, respectively. The 
mean blood pressure was 154/93 mmHg. After the 8-week treatment, there was a 
significant decrease in blood pressure to 140/86 mmHg (p < 0.001), with mean 
pressure reduction of 14/7.5 mmHg. The normalization rate was 44 per cent and 
the response rate was 68 per cent. No significant changes were found for mean 
heart rate and any laboratory parameters tested. Only 17 patients reported mild 
and transient side effects such as drowsiness and dryness of the mouth and 
throat, which required no treatment.
CONCLUSION: This study has shown that rilmenidine is an effective and well 
tolerated monotherapy in Thai patients with mild-to-moderate essential 
hypertension.

PMID: 14650701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
