1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1009:288-95. doi: 10.1196/annals.1304.059.

Apparent absence of direct renal effect of imidazoline receptor agonists.

Smyth DD(1), Pirnat D, Forzley B, Penner SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology Therapeutics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada. dsmyth@ms.umanitoba.ca

Imidazoline receptor agonists such as moxonidine and rilmenidine increase sodium 
excretion whether administered within the central nervous system, intravenously, 
or directly into the renal artery. To determine if this natriuresis was mediated 
by a direct renal effect and was independent of the renal sympathetic nerves, we 
used two different preparations in the pentobarbital-anesthetized rat. In the 
first series of studies, rats were unilaterally nephrectomized 7 to 10 days 
before the experiment. On the day of the experiment, the remaining kidney was 
denervated (surgical and 10% phenol/ 95% ethyl alcohol) or sham treated. The 
effect of an intravenous infusion of rilmenidine was determined. Rilmenidine (10 
nmol/kg/minute) decreased blood pressure and increased urine flow rate and 
sodium excretion in the sham- but not the denervation-treated rats. The response 
to furosemide (5.05 nmol/kg/minute) remained intact following denervation. We 
then used a two-kidney rat model that allowed for separate urine collection from 
each ureter. We used low infusion rates of moxonidine directly into the left 
renal artery. An increase in urine flow rate from the left but not the right 
kidney would suggest a direct renal action. Low infusion rates of moxonidine 
(10, 30 nmol/kg/minute) increased urine flow rate similarly from both ureters. A 
low infusion rate of furosemide (9.1 nmol/kg/minute) into the left renal artery 
increased urine flow rate only from the left ureter. The failure of moxonidine 
to increase urine flow rate selectively only in the left kidney indicated the 
agonist acts at an extrarenal site to increase urine flow rate from both kidneys 
equally. The complete attenuation of the response to rilmenidine indicates the 
importance of the renal nerves and suggests that the extrarenal site is most 
probably the central nervous system. Collectively, these studies do not support 
a direct renal action of imidazoline agonists in producing natriuresis.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1304.059
PMID: 15028602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
