1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1009:251-61. doi: 10.1196/annals.1304.031.

The role of I(1)-imidazoline receptors and alpha(2)-adrenergic receptors in the 
modulation of glucose and lipid metabolism in the SHROB model of metabolic 
syndrome X.

Koletsky RJ(1), Velliquette RA, Ernsberger P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4906, USA.

Hypertension is commonly accompanied by obesity, hyperlipidemia, and insulin 
resistance in humans, a cluster of abnormalities known as metabolic syndrome X. 
With the notable exception of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system, which 
have mildly beneficial effects on insulin resistance, most antihypertensive 
agents worsen one or more components of metabolic syndrome X. Second-generation 
centrally acting antihypertensive agents such as rilmenidine and moxonidine have 
mixed effects on components of metabolic syndrome X, which might reflect in part 
actions on two different receptors: I(1)-imidazoline and alpha(2)-adrenergic. 
Using a rat model of metabolic syndrome X, we sought to separate the influence 
of these two receptors on glucose and lipid metabolism by using selective 
antagonists. Rilmenidine and moxonidine acutely raised glucose and lowered 
insulin, thereby further worsening glucose tolerance. These effects were 
entirely mediated by alpha(2)-adrenergic receptors. Rilmenidine and moxonidine 
also lowered glucagon, an effect that was mediated solely by I(1)-imidazoline 
receptors since it was potentiated by alpha(2)-blockade, but eliminated in the 
presence of I(1)-antagonists. Lowering of triglyceride and cholesterol levels 
followed the same pattern as glucagon, implicating I(1)-imidazoline receptors in 
lipid-lowering actions. Chronic treatment with moxonidine reproduced the 
beneficial effects on glucagon and lipids while the acute hyperglycemic response 
did not persist. Thus, alpha(2)-adrenergic receptors mediate an acute 
deterioration of glucose tolerance, whereas in contrast I(1)-imidazoline 
receptors appear to mediate the persistent long-term improvements in glucose 
tolerance. The therapeutic action of I(1)-imidazoline agonists may be primarily 
mediated through reduced glucagon secretion.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1304.031
PMID: 15028595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
