1. Wiad Lek. 2003;56(11-12):527-31.

[Effect of Rilmenidine(Tenaxum) on the activity of the autonomic nervous system 
in patients with hypertension and asthma].

[Article in Polish]

Konieczny B(1), Hefczyc J, Szyguła B, Szyguła J, Kossmann S.

Author information:
(1)Kliniki Chorób Wewnetrznych i Farmakologii Klinicznej Slaskiej Akademii 
Medycznej w Katowicach.

Application of beta-adrenoreceptor blockers in asthmatic patients increases 
broncho-constriction, and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors may induce 
cough. In either case life quality of asthmatics may deteriorate. Increased 
sympathetic activity plays a significant role in the development and maintenance 
of arterial hypertension. Recently imidazoline receptor agonists have been used 
in the treatment of hypertension. The action of these drugs results in 
modification of the vegetative nervous system due to a decreased activity of the 
adrenergic system. Such modification could be disadvantageous in asthmatic 
patients in whom an increased parasympathetic tonus is an important mechanism of 
bronchoconstriction. The aim of the paper was to assess the autonomic nervous 
system during spontaneous overnight sleep in 10 mild or moderate asthmatic women 
in a stable stage of the disease; they were all treated for mild or moderate 
arterial hypertension with Tenaxum 1 mg daily. The examination consisted in 
spectral analysis of the heart rate variability of 10 min. periods repeated 
every five minutes. The following parameters of the spectral power were studied: 
high frequency components (HF) reflecting parasympathetic activity, low 
frequency components (LF) representing sympathetic activity, as well as the 
LF/HF ratio. The investigations, including spirometry, were performed before and 
on the 3rd and 21st day of treatment. Arterial tension was brought to normal in 
7 out of 10 patients. Spirometric parameters (VC, FEV1, MEF50%FVC, MEF25%FVC) 
did not undergo any significant changes, however a significantly increased 
parasympathetic activity (HF) in the studied patients was found on day 21. The 
results of our investigations indicate that Tenaxum can be a safe therapeutic 
agent in the treatment of mild or moderate arterial hypertension in asthmatics.

PMID: 15058158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
