1. Med Hypotheses. 2004;62(5):830-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2003.11.007.

Elevated sympathetic activity may promote insulin resistance syndrome by 
activating alpha-1 adrenergic receptors on adipocytes.

McCarty MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Pantox Laboratories, 4622 Santa Fe St., San Diego, CA 29109, USA. 
mmccarty@nai-online.com

An excess of free intracellular calcium can reduce the efficiency of 
insulin-mediated glucose transport by blocking the dephosphorylation of GLUT-4. 
Classical isoforms of protein kinase C (PKC) can interfere with insulin 
signalling via serine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and the insulin receptor. 
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), by activating phospholipase C-beta in adipocytes, can 
promote a sustained increase in intracellular free calcium in these cells, while 
also activating classical PKCs. This may rationalize the fact that insulin 
resistance is a typical feature of hyperparathyroidism, as well as 
epidemiological evidence that regular ingestion of dairy products or of 
ethanol--which down-regulates PTH secretion--reduces risk for insulin resistance 
syndrome and diabetes. Alpha-1 adrenergic receptors of adipocytes--like PTH 
receptors--also activate phospholipase C-beta, and thus have an effect analogous 
to PTH on intracellular free calcium and PKC activity in adipocytes. This 
suggests that, via activation of alpha-1 adrenergic receptors, increased 
sympathetic activity in adipose tissue may promote insulin resistance syndrome. 
In fact, measures which provoke increased sympathetic output--such as diuretic 
use and severe salt restriction--are known to compromise insulin sensitivity, 
whereas alpha-1 antagonist drugs, as well as drugs that act centrally to 
suppress sympathetic activity, typically have a favorable effect on insulin 
function. When insulin resistance syndrome is associated with elevated 
sympathetic activity--for example, in hypertensives who are obese or on diuretic 
therapy--measures which down-regulate sympathetic activity, or, more 
specifically, alpha-1 adrenergic activity, may be warranted. These include 
centrally acting imidazoline analogs (moxonidine, rilmenidine) and alpha-1 
antagonists (doxazosin, prazosin). Taurine and high-dose pyridoxine may 
represent practical nutritional strategies for moderating elevated sympathetic 
activity, and exercise training and low-insulin-response diets may be useful in 
this regard as well.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2003.11.007
PMID: 15082116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
