1. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2004 Aug;57(8):745-50.

[The effects of rilmenidine on cardiac autonomic function in healthy 
volunteers].

[Article in Spanish]

Onrat E(1), Kaya D, Kerpeten K, Kilit C, Celik A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Afyon Kocatepe University, 
Afyon, Turkey. eronrat@aku.edu.tr

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Rilmenidine is an antihypertensive drug whose 
antihypertensive effect occurs via a sympatholytic action on the central nervous 
system. However, the effects of rilmenidine on autonomic cardiovascular function 
are not clear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the acute effect of 
rilmenidine on autonomic cardiac function by measuring heart rate variability.
SUBJECTS AND METHOD: A total of 20 healthy men (mean age, 263 years) were 
included in the study; 1 mg of rilmenidine or placebo was given to participants 
on different days in a double-blind crossover randomized study protocol. After 
drug administration, time domain and frequency domain parameters of heart rate 
variability were determined before and after 2 h with the patient in supine 
decubitus and during the handgrip exercise with 5-min electrocardiographic 
recordings.
RESULTS: Rilmenidine caused an increase in mean RR values after administration 
when compared to pre-drug administration recordings with the patient in supine 
decubitus (929 ms vs 860 ms, P<.05), but this effect was not found in the 
placebo group. However, there were no differences in other time domain 
parameters or in any of the frequency domain parameters (normalized low 
frequency unit, normalized high frequency unit and low frequency/high frequency 
ratio) with the participant in supine position in either group. In addition, 
neither rilmenidine nor placebo modified heart rate variability parameters 
during the handgrip exercise.
CONCLUSION: Administration of a single dose of rilmenidine increased vagal tone 
without affecting vagal modulation in the supine position. The absence of vagal 
tone increase during the handgrip exercise suggests that this effect of 
rilmenidine is minimal.

PMID: 15282063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
