1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2004 Dec;25(12):1640-6.

Rilmenidine prevents blood pressure increase in rats with compromised nitric 
oxide production.

Gerová M(1), Török J, Pecháòová O, Matusková J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
813 71 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

AIM: To search tools of high blood pressure in the model of nitric oxide 
(NO)-defective hypertension, and the study focused on the effect of rilmenidine, 
agonist of imidazoline receptors, which was suggested to modulate central 
sympathetic outflow.
METHODS: Three experimental groups, each consisting of 7 rats, were used: (I) 
rats with inhibition of NO synthase (NOS) by N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester 
(L-NAME) 40 mg.kg(-1).d(-1) for 4 weeks in drinking water, (II) rats with 
inhibited NOS as in group I , plus agonist of imidazoline receptors rilmenidine 
3 mg.kg(-1).d(-1) for 4 weeks by gavage, and (III) control rats. Systolic blood 
pressure was measured weekly noninvasively. At the end of experiment aortic ring 
isometric tension was followed, NOS expression (aorta, left ventricle), and NOS 
activity (left ventricle and brain) were determined.
RESULTS: In the group I systolic blood pressure increased significantly, aortic 
ring relaxation to acetylcholine was significantly attenuated. Rilmenidine 
administered simultaneously with L-NAME (group II) prevented the increase of 
blood pressure which did not differ significantly from control values; aortic 
ring relaxation to acetylcholine did not differ from control. No change in NOS 
expression (aorta and left ventricle) was found in groups I and II. Significant 
decline in NOS activity (left ventricle and brain) was found in groups I and II.
CONCLUSION: Rilmenidine has a remarkable role in NO-defective hypertension, 
possibly by inhibiting central sympathetic outflow and by affecting receptors in 
vascular smooth muscle also. The prime cause of hypertension in this 
experimental model--the compromised production of NO due to inhibition of 
NOS--was not affected by rilmenidine.

PMID: 15569409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
