1. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 2005 Mar;27(2):119-25. doi: 
10.1358/mf.2005.27.2.876281.

Clinical evidence for drug treatments in obesity-associated hypertensive 
patients--a discussion paper.

Doggrell SA(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Australia. 
s_doggrell@yahoo.com

The association between obesity and hypertension is well known. The hemodynamic 
features of obesity-related hypertension are an expansion of extracellular 
volume inducing hypervolaemia and increased cardiac output, with activation of 
both the sympathetic nervous system and the renin--angiotensin system. It is 
suggested that obesity-related hypertension may be considered as a subset of 
essential hypertension, and treated as an identity. Orlistat and sibutramine 
both reduce body weight in the obese patients. The use of orlistat in obese 
hypertensive patients is associated with a small decrease in blood pressure, 
whereas sibutramine may increase the blood pressure. Thus, orlistat may be 
preferred in the obese hypertensive patients. Diuretics and beta-blockers 
decrease insulin sensitivity, which is an unwanted effect in obesity, and should 
be used with caution in obese hypertensive patients. The calcium channel 
blockers have no or minor effects on insulin sensitivity and may be considered 
for use in obese hypertensive patients. Inhibitors of the effects of angiotensin 
may be the antihypertensive drugs of choice for obese hypertensive patients, as 
in addition to reducing blood pressure, ACE inhibitors and AT(1) receptor 
antagonists have no effect or improve insulin sensitivity, and are 
renoprotective. More clinical trials are needed for the centrally acting 
antihypertensives (clonidine, rilmenidine) in obese hypertensive patients, as 
they inhibit the sympathetic nervous and renin--angiotensin systems, which are 
overactive in this population.

Copyright 2005 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/mf.2005.27.2.876281
PMID: 15834464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
