1. Am J Hypertens. 2008 Jan;21(1):54-60. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2007.9.

Improvement of cardiac diastolic function by long-term centrally mediated 
sympathetic inhibition in one-kidney, one-clip hypertensive rabbits.

Signolet IL(1), Bousquet PP, Monassier LJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie and Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire, Faculté de 
Médecine, France.

BACKGROUND: Hypertension is associated with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) 
and diastolic dysfunction. The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) is strongly 
implicated in these alterations. The possible beneficial effect of a centrally 
mediated sympathetic inhibition on the diastolic function in severe hypertension 
has never been studied. We have evaluated the cardiac effects (remodeling, 
diastolic and systolic functions) of a long-term treatment with a centrally 
acting drug, rilmenidine, in a model of severe renovascular hypertension.
METHODS: One-kidney, one-clip (1K,1C) Goldblatt hypertensive rabbits were 
randomized in two groups, one receiving rilmenidine (5 mg/kg/day) for 6 weeks 
and the other treated with vehicle only. Hemodynamic effects and left 
ventricular (LV) remodeling were evaluated by serial tail cuff pressure 
measurements, and echocardiography every 15 days. These measurements were 
followed up with invasive hemodynamic measurements and histological analysis.
RESULTS: Rilmenidine induced a decrease of 8% in blood pressure, a significant 
bradycardia (19% at 6 weeks after treatment) and an 18% reduction in LV mass, 
without reduction of ejection fraction (EF). These effects were accompanied by 
an improvement of the diastolic function, as shown by isovolumic relaxation time 
and decrease in Tau index, an E/A ratio reversion, and an Ea velocity increase. 
Moreover, reduction in the atrial (A) and atrial reverse (Ar) velocities, 
without any effect on LV filling pressures, was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In 1K,1C Goldblatt rabbits, which mimic most of the characteristics 
of human hypertensive cardiopathy, we have shown, for the first time, that a 
central inhibition of the SNS rapidly reverses cardiac hypertrophy and problems 
associated with primary LV relaxation, without negative inotropic action.

DOI: 10.1038/ajh.2007.9
PMID: 18091744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
