1. Br J Pharmacol. 2008 Apr;153(8):1623-30. doi: 10.1038/bjp.2008.35. Epub 2008
Feb  25.

The antiarrhythmic effect of centrally administered rilmenidine involves 
muscarinic receptors, protein kinase C and mitochondrial signalling pathways.

Iwasaki M(1), Hayashi Y, Kamibayashi T, Yamatodani A, Mashimo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka, Japan. 
miwasaki@anes.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: We have previously demonstrated that stimulation of 
imidazoline receptors in the CNS prevented halothane-adrenaline arrhythmias 
during halothane anaesthesia and that stimulation of the vagus nerve may be 
critical to this effect. However, details of the mechanism(s) involved are not 
yet available. The present study was designed to examine the role of muscarinic 
receptors, protein kinase C (PKC), ATP-sensitive potassium channels (K(ATP)) and 
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) in the antiarrhythmic 
effect of rilmenidine, an imidazoline receptor agonist.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Rats were anaesthetized with halothane and monitored 
continuously for arterial blood pressure and premature ventricular contractions. 
The arrhythmogenic dose of adrenaline was defined as the lowest dose producing 
three or more premature ventricular contractions within a 15-s period. We 
confirmed that centrally administered rilmenidine prevented halothane-adrenaline 
arrhythmias and then examined the antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine in the 
presence of atropine methylnitrate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist, calphostin 
C, a PKC inhibitor, HMR-1098, a sarcolemmal K(ATP) inhibitor, 5-hydroxydecanoic 
acid, a mitochondrial K(ATP) inhibitor or atractyloside, an MPTP opener.
KEY RESULTS: The antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine was significantly 
inhibited by atropine methylnitrate, calphostin C, 5-hydroxydecanoic acid and 
atractyloside, but the effects of HMR-1098 in our model were not clear.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The present results suggest that muscarinic 
receptors, PKC, mitochondrial K(ATP) channels and MPTP may be crucial components 
of the mechanism involved in the antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine given into 
the CNS.

DOI: 10.1038/bjp.2008.35
PMCID: PMC2438259
PMID: 18297108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
