1. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009 Mar;60(1):131-42.

Testing conception of engagement of imidazoline receptors in imidazoline drugs 
effects on isolated rat heart atria.

Radwanska A(1), Dlugokecka J, Wasilewski R, Kaliszan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics and Phamacodynamics, Medical University of 
Gdansk, Gen. J. Hallera 107, Gdansk, Poland. alex@amg.gda.pl

Recently, attention has been payed to the role of imidazolines in physiology of 
the heart. However, no systematic comparative studies were reported regarding 
the activity of a representative set of specific ligands towards imidazoline 
receptors in the heart preparations. The aim of this project was to test effects 
of a set of ligands on the pharmacological function of putative imidazoline 
receptors in isolated rat heart atria. Known imidazoline drugs with a postulated 
high affinity to imidazoline I(1) receptor: AGN192403, rilmenidine, moxonidine 
and clonidine were used. The specific ligands of imidazoline I(2) receptor: 
2-BFI, BU239 and putative natural ligand for imidazoline I(1), I(2) and I(3) 
receptors, agmatine, were tested also. The spontaneously beating right and left 
atria, driven electrically, were studied. Dose-response curves for amplitude and 
rate of the contractions of the atria were produced by administration of 
increasing doses of the agents. Phentolamine as alpha(1)/alpha(2) adrenergic 
receptors blocker and idazoxan as I(2)/I(1)/alpha(2) receptors blocker were 
added in order to inhibit ino- and chronotropic effects of the compounds 
studied. The -log EC(50) parameters were calculated. The positive inotropic 
effect on left atria were evoked with the rank order of potency: agmatine >> 
clonidine > BU239 > rilmenidine > or = moxonidine and these effects were 
generally diminished by idazoxan. Moxonidine produced a weak positive inotropic 
effect potentiated by idazoxan. Rilmenidine and moxonidine were assumed to act 
as partial agonists of imidazoline I(1) receptor. AGN192403 did not change the 
amplitude of beating of left atria. The positive chronotropic effects on 
spontaneously beating right heart atria were with in the following order of 
potency: BU239 > or = agmatine >>> clonidine > AGN192403. Idazoxan markedly 
antagonized chronotropic effect of both BU239 and agmatine. 2-BFI weakly 
diminished the rate of beating of atria; moxonidine and rilmenidine had no 
effect. In conclusion, imidazoline receptors of the I(1) subtype may be involved 
in inotropic reaction of the agents studied, but this effect depends mainly on 
the alpha(2)/alpha(1) adrenergic receptors. Engagement of I(2) imidazoline 
receptors, along with the alpha(2) adrenergic ones, in chronotropic activity of 
isolated right atria of rat has been demonstrated.

PMID: 19439815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
