1. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1990 Jul;83(8):1325-8.

[Selectivity of a new antihypertensive agent, rilmenidine, for imidazoline 
receptors in the human brain].

[Article in French]

Bricca G(1), Dontenwill M, Feldman J, Belcourt A, Bousquet P.

Author information:
(1)Institut de pharmacologie, faculté de médecine, CNRS URA 589, université 
Louis-Pasteur, Strasbourg.

The involvement of the central nervous system in the global hypotensive effect 
of rilménidine (R) was already suspected after experiments on cats and dogs. 
Indeed, the injection of this drug in the vertebral artery provoked a decrease 
in the arterial blood pressure in these two species. Recently, we showed that 
intracisternal injections of cumulative doses (1 to 300 micrograms/kg) in 
anaesthetized rabbits significantly lowered the blood pressure. In that protocol 
the efficient dose 20% was 1.5 micrograms/kg when it was 70 micrograms/kg for 
intravenous injections. The hypotension was always associated with bradycardia. 
Thus we confirmed that the drop in the arterial blood pressure induced by R was, 
at least partially, due to a central inhibition of the vasomotor tone. When we 
pretreated anaesthetized rabbits, always by intracisternal injections, with 
identical doses of yohimbine or idazoxan (5 nmoles/kg), we observed that 
idazoxan prevented much more the hypotensive effects of R than yohimbine. This 
study demonstrated that R whose chemical structure is close to that of 
imidazolines was much better antagonized by a substance with an imidazoline-like 
structure than by a classical alpha 2-antagonist. These results were confirmed 
by binding studies realized with human brain membranes. Tritiated clonidine was 
bound to cortical membrane preparations, containing mainly alpha 
2-adrenoceptors, as well as to medullary membrane preparations, containing 
mainly imidazoline receptors. We observed that R selectivity for the medullary 
imidazoline preferring receptors was 2.5 times higher than that of the reference 
substance, clonidine. So, it seems that the central hypotensive effect of R 
might be related to its interaction with imidazoline specific 
receptors.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1979731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
