1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Nov 25;647(1-3):155-60. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.08.035.  Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway and endogenous 
nitric oxide are needed for the antiarrhythmic effect of centrally administered 
rilmenidine.

Yamanaka H(1), Hayashi Y, Iwasaki M, Kamibayashi T, Yamatodani A, Mashimo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.

Activation of imidazoline receptors in the central nervous system has protective 
effect on several types of arrhythmias. We demonstrated that centrally 
administered rilmenidine, a selective imidazoline receptor agonist, prevented 
adrenaline-induced arrhythmias during halothane anaesthesia. However, detailed 
myocardial signaling of the antiarrhythmic effect remains to be unexplored. The 
present study was designed to examine a role of pertussis toxin-sensitive G 
protein, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway and endogenous 
nitric oxide in the antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine. Male Sprague-Dawley 
rats were anaesthetized with halothane and monitored continuously for arterial 
blood pressure and premature ventricular contractions. The arrhythmogenic dose 
of adrenaline was defined as the smallest dose producing 3 or more premature 
ventricular contractions within 15-s period. Firstly, we confirmed that 
centrally administered rilmenidine prevented adrenaline-induced arrhythmias 
during halothane anaesthesia and examined the effect of pertussis toxin, 
wortmannin (a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor), and nitro-L-arginine 
methyl ester (L-NAME) (a specific nitric oxide synthesis inhibitors), on the 
antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine. We also performed Western blot analysis to 
determine phosphorylation of Akt and glycogen synthase kinase 3β, a direct Akt 
downstream target, following the central administration of rilmenidine. The 
antiarrhythmic effect of rilmenidine was significantly inhibited by pertussis 
toxin, wortmannin and L-NAME. Rilmenidine increased Akt and glycogen synthase 
kinase 3β phosphorylation (28±13% and 32±13%, respectively), and this action was 
abolished by wortmannin. The present results demonstrated that pertussis 
toxin-sensitive G protein, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt-GSK3β signaling 
pathway and endogenous nitric oxide may play a key role in antiarrhythmic effect 
of centrally administered rilmenidine.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.08.035
PMID: 20816810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
