1. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1990 Dec;83 Spec No 4:27-30.

[Remission of left ventricular hypertrophy of hypertensive origin. Experimental 
data].

[Article in French]

Contard F(1), Rappaport L, Samuel JL, Swynghedauw B.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 127, hôpital Lariboisière, Paris.

Left ventricular hypertrophy is an adaptation of the cardiac fibre to the 
imposed mechanical overload. This adaptation is quantitative; increased numbers 
of contractile units with decreased wall stress. Qualitative changes in genomic 
expression allow the hypertrophied cardiac fibre to develop a normal active 
tension at the expense of its maximal shortening velocity. These changes are 
preceded by the temporary expression of proto-oncogenes, of genes of the 
proteins of thermal shock and by reorganisation of the cytoskeleton, all 
possible candidates of the regulation of the gene expression in cardiac 
hypertrophy. In the long-term, the hypertrophy becomes harmful: inadequate 
subendocardial vascular development; the lowering of the Vmax is beneficial at 
cellular level but eventually affects cardiac output; ventricular compliance 
decreases with the development of fibrosis; changes in calcium metabolism are 
arrhythmogenic. Modifying, prolonging and improving the natural process of 
adaptation is clearly the first therapeutic objective in order to decrease the 
hypertension and cause the hypertrophy to regress. Propranolol acts by reducing 
the cardiac work load. However, betablockers have the disadvantage of increasing 
the relative density of the subendocardial collagen. Rilmenidine decreases the 
quantity and density of the collagen. Vasodilators and diuretics induce 
regression of the myocytic hypertrophy by lowering the threshold of adaptation 
of these cells, but they have no effect on collagen synthesis. Angiotensin 
converting enzyme inhibitors which have been shown to be beneficial in 
controlling hypertension, induce a decrease in the hypertrophy of the myocytes 
and reduce fibrosis.

PMID: 2150472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
