1. Eur Heart J. 2012 May;33(9):1058-66. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs041. Epub 2012 
Apr 16.

The human sympathetic nervous system: its relevance in hypertension and heart 
failure.

Parati G(1), Esler M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, S Luca Hospital, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, piazza Brescia 20, 20149 Milan, Italy. gianfranco.parati@unimib.it

Evidence assembled in this review indicates that sympathetic nervous system 
dysfunction is crucial in the development of heart failure and essential 
hypertension. This takes the form of persistent and adverse activation of 
sympathetic outflows to the heart and kidneys in both conditions. An important 
goal for clinical scientists is translation of the knowledge of pathophysiology, 
such as this, into better treatment for patients. The achievement of this 
'mechanisms to management' transition is at different stages of development with 
regard to the two disorders. Clinical translation is mature in cardiac failure, 
knowledge of cardiac neural pathophysiology having led to the introduction of 
beta-adrenergic blockers, an effective therapy. With essential hypertension 
perhaps we are on the cusp of effective translation, with recent successful 
testing of selective catheter-based renal sympathetic nerve ablation in patients 
with resistant hypertension, an intervention firmly based on the demonstration 
of activation of the renal sympathetic outflow. Additional evidence in this 
regard is provided by the results of pilot studies exploring the possibility to 
reduce blood pressure in resistant hypertensives through electrical stimulation 
of the area of carotid baroreceptors. Despite the general importance of the 
sympathetic nervous system in blood pressure regulation, and the specific 
demonstration that the blood pressure elevation in essential hypertension is 
commonly initiated and sustained by sympathetic nervous activation, drugs 
antagonizing this system are currently underutilized in the care of patients 
with hypertension. Use of beta-adrenergic blocking drugs is waning, given the 
propensity of this drug class to have adverse metabolic effects, including 
predisposition to diabetes development. The blood pressure lowering achieved 
with carotid baroreceptor stimulation and with the renal denervation device 
affirms the importance of the sympathetic nervous system in hypertension 
pathogenesis, and perhaps suggests a wider role for anti-adrenergic 
antihypertensives, such as the imidazoline drug class (moxonidine, rilmenidine) 
which act within the CNS to inhibit central sympathetic outflow, although the 
lack of large-scale outcome trials with this drug class remains a very material 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs041
PMID: 22507981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
