1. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1989 Dec;82 Spec No 5:25-9.

[Current data on the pharmacology of rilmenidine].

[Article in French]

Montastruc JL(1), Macquin-Mavier I, Damase-Michel C, Dard B, Tran MA, Valet P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de pharmacologie médicale et clinique, INSERM U 317, faculté de 
médecine, Toulouse.

Oral rilmenidine (1 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks) significantly reduces the blood 
pressure and heart rate of conscious barodenervated dogs. A dose-dependent 
decrease in blood pressure and heart rate has been demonstrated with 
intraveinous rilmenidine (0.1 to 1 mg/kg) in pentobarbitone anaesthetised 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). Chronic subcutaneous administration of 
rilmenidine (5 to 15 mg/kg/day) also produces a dose-dependent decrease of these 
two parameters in conscious SHR. In addition, rilmenidine reduces plasma 
noradrenaline and the liberation of catecholamines from the adrenal medulla; 
these actions could contribute to its antihypertensive effect. The hypotensive 
effect of rilmenidine, clonidine and related molecules, is due to a reduction in 
sympathetic tone of central or peripheral origin. Although rilmenidine binds to 
alpha-2 adrenergic receptors, it does not cause sedation in animal models: it 
does not prolong barbiturate-induced sleep in the mouse and rat at doses of up 
to 10 mg/kg and does not affect spontaneous locomotor activity in the rat at 
doses of up to 2.5 mg/kg. The results show a dissociation of the sedative and 
antihypertensive effects of rilmenadine. The almost complete absence of sedation 
in animal models may be explained by: as yet unknown properties inhibiting 
sedation, a preferential peripheral site of action and/or the presence of 
separate central receptors accounting for the sedative or hypotensive effects. 
The precise mechanism of the hypotensive effects of rilmenidine is currently 
under study. The binding of rilmenidine at central "imidazoline receptor" sites 
responsible for the regulation of the blood pressure could explain its mode of 
action and why its pharmacological profile is different to that of other 
centrally acting hypotensive agents.

PMID: 2517006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
