1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1989 May;249(2):583-91.

Human fat cell alpha-2 adrenoceptors. I. Functional exploration and 
pharmacological definition with selected alpha-2 agonists and antagonists.

Galitzky J(1), Mauriege P, Berlan M, Lafontan M.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (I.N.S.E.R.M., 
U.317), Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

This study was undertaken to investigate more fully the pharmacological 
characteristics of the human fat cell alpha-2 adrenoceptor. Biological assays 
were performed on intact isolated fat cells while radioligand binding studies 
were carried out with [3H]yohimbine in membranes. These pharmacological studies 
brought: 1) a critical definition of the limits of the experimental conditions 
required for the exploration of alpha-2 adrenergic responsiveness on human fat 
cells and membranes; 2) an improvement in the pharmacological definition of the 
human fat cell postsynaptic alpha-2 adrenoceptor. Among alpha-2 agonists, 
UK-14,304 was the most potent and the relative order of potency was: UK-14,304 
greater than p-aminoclonidine greater than clonidine = B-HT 920 greater than 
rilmenidine. For alpha-2 antagonists, the potency order was: yohimbine greater 
than idazoxan greater than SK&F-86,466 much greater than benextramine; 3) a 
description of the impact of benextramine (irreversible alpha-1/alpha-2 
antagonist) on human fat cell alpha-2 adrenergic receptors and on human fat cell 
function; the drug inactivates the alpha-2 adrenergic receptors with a minor 
impact on beta adrenergic receptors and without noticeable alterations of fat 
cell function as assessed by preservation of beta adrenergic and Al-adenosine 
receptor-mediated lipolytic responses; and 4) a definition of the relationship 
existing between alpha-2 adrenergic receptor occupancy, inhibition of adenylate 
cyclase activity and antilipolysis with full and partial agonists. The existence 
of a receptor reserve must be taken into account when evaluating alpha-2 
adrenergic receptor distribution and regulation of human fat cells.

PMID: 2566681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
