1. Am J Med. 1989 Sep 18;87(3C):14S-17S. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90499-3.

Recent advances in the pharmacology of rilmenidine.

Montastruc JL(1), Macquin-Mavier I, Tran MA, Damase-Michel C, Koenig-Berard E, 
Valet P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Médicale et Clinique, INSERM U317, Faculté de 
Médecine, France.

The antihypertensive properties of rilmenidine, an oxazoline derivative, have 
been demonstrated in several experimental models of hypertension after short- or 
long-term administration. In pentobarbitone-anesthetized spontaneously 
hypertensive rats, intravenous rilmenidine (0.1 to 1 mg/kg) dose-dependently 
reduced blood pressure and heart rate. Upon long-term subcutaneous infusion (5 
to 15 mg/kg per day) in conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats, rilmenidine 
induced a dose-dependent decrease in both cardiovascular parameters. In 
conscious sino-aortic denervated dogs, rilmenidine (1 mg/kg orally for two 
weeks) significantly reduced blood pressure and heart rate. The hypotensive 
action of rilmenidine is mediated through a reduction in peripheral sympathetic 
tone, resulting from a central action and possibly a peripheral action. 
Rilmenidine also decreases catecholamine release from the adrenal medulla which 
might contribute to the antihypertensive effect. Therefore, rilmenidine acts 
similarly to clonidine and related compounds in order to lower blood pressure, 
i.e., reduction of sympathetic tone. Nevertheless, although it binds to alpha 
2-adrenoceptors, rilmenidine did not cause sedation in animal models: at doses 
up to 10 mg/kg in mice and rats, it did not prolong the barbiturate-induced 
sleeping time and did not modify the spontaneous locomotor activity in rats at 
doses up to 2.5 mg/kg. These results demonstrate a dissociation between sedative 
and antihypertensive effects of rilmenidine. Three hypotheses have been proposed 
to explain why this drug is almost devoid of sedative activity in animal 
experimental models: (1) unknown properties counteracting the alpha 
2-adrenoceptor-mediated sedation; (2) a preferential action at the peripheral 
level; (3) central receptors involved in sedation and hypotension may be 
different. The intimate mechanism underlying the hypotensive effects of 
rilmenidine is currently under investigation. The evidence for rilmenidine 
binding on central sites named "imidazoline sites" involved in blood pressure 
regulation could possibly provide further insight into its mechanism of action 
and explain the duality of its effects.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90499-3
PMID: 2571291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
