1. Am J Med. 1989 Sep 18;87(3C):10S-13S. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90498-1.

New concepts on the central regulation of blood pressure. Alpha 2-adrenoceptors 
and "imidazoline receptors".

Bousquet P(1), Feldman J, Tibirica E, Bricca G, Molines A, Dontenwill M, 
Belcourt A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire et Rénale, CNRS UA 589, Faculté 
de Médecine, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

The most usual hypothesis to explain the central hypotensive effect of 
clonidine-like substances was to admit that these drugs stimulated alpha 
2-adrenoceptors within the brainstem. Now it has been demonstrated that neither 
the endogenous ligand to the alpha-adrenoceptors, noradrenaline, nor any other 
catecholamine or phenylethylamine was hypotensive in the medullary nucleus 
reticularis lateralis, where all imidazolines proved to be such. Recently, a 
membrane receptor population sensitive to clonidine and insensitive to 
catecholamines was described within the nucleus reticularis lateralis; this 
subgroup of receptors represented 20 to 30 percent of the [3H]clonidine binding 
sites in the bovine nucleus reticularis lateralis and 100 percent within the 
human nucleus reticularis lateralis region. Thus, the existence of such 
imidazoline specific receptors was clearly established and the endogenous ligand 
for those receptors, which is neither a catecholamine nor likely a peptide, is 
under processing for purification. Therefore, it appeared that the hypotensive 
effect of substances with an imidazoline or imidazoline-like structure might be 
due to their action within medullary receptors specific for this endogenous 
ligand temporarily named "clonidine displacing substance." Rilmenidine, 
structurally close to imidazolines, also interfered with these receptors. The 
central component of its hypotensive effect was recently confirmed in rabbits, 
where its central cardiovascular effects were antagonized by "the clonidine 
displacing substance." Although exhibiting a lower affinity than the reference 
substance for these receptors, rilmenidine might have a higher selectivity, thus 
explaining its restricted side effects. A structure-activity study with this 
molecule would bring a confirmation to these first observations.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90498-1
PMID: 2571290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
