1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2018 Apr 5;824:148-156. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.001.
Epub  2018 Feb 13.

Ameliorative effects of clonidine on ethanol induced kidney injury in rats: 
Potential role for imidazoline-1 receptor.

Elkomy NMIM(1), Ibrahim IAAE(2), Elshazly SM(1), El-Fayoumi HM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig 
University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig 
University, Egypt. Electronic address: eaebrahiem@pharmacy.zu.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig 
University, Egypt; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Kantara Sinai University, Egypt.

Chronic alcoholism is a risk factor for kidney injury. Clonidine is an 
α2-adrenergic receptor/imidazoline-1 receptor agonist that can reduce blood 
pressure and maintain renal functions. This study aims to investigate the 
possible ameliorative effects of clonidine on ethanol induced kidney injury and 
its mechanism of action. Kidney injury was induced in rats by adding ethanol to 
drinking water for eight weeks. Clonidine effects on kidney functions and 
histopathology were measured. Moreover, phentolamine (α-adrenergic receptor 
antagonist), efaroxan (imidazoline-1 receptor antagonist) and rilmenidine 
(imidazoline-1 receptor agonist) were used to clarify the role of imidazoline-1 
receptor in mediating renal ameliorative effects. Also, the effect of clonidine 
on liver functions and metabolic changes, in addition to renal oxidative stress, 
inflammatory and apoptotic pathways were measured. Results showed that, 
clonidine improved renal functions and reduced ethanol induced renal 
inflammation and fibrosis. On the other hand, efaroxan, only, blocked clonidine 
effects on kidney functions. Rilmenidine decreased kidney injury like clonidine. 
Both clonidine and rilmenidine increased renal nischarin gene expression. 
Furthermore, clonidine improved liver functions, increased serum insulin and 
decreased serum advanced glycation end products (metabolic markers). Also, 
clonidine reduced renal oxidative stress as reflected by decreased 
myeloperoxidase, malondialdehyde, inducible nitric oxide synthase and total 
nitric oxide levels and increased superoxide dismutase level. Moreover, 
clonidine reduced renal tumor necrosis factor-α (inflammatory marker) and 
caspase-3 (apoptotic marker) levels, while increased renal prostaglandine E2 and 
interleukin-10 levels (anti-inflammatory markers). In conclusion, clonidine can 
reduce ethanol induced kidney injury, at least in part, by stimulating 
imidazoline-1 receptor signaling.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.001
PMID: 29452086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
