1. Acta Pol Pharm. 2017 Mar;74(2):579-586.

COMPARISON OF THE EFFECTS OF MARSANIDINE DERIVATIVES ON RAT CARDIOVASCULAR 
SYSTEM.

Boblewski K, Lehmann A, Marchwinska A, Kornicka A, Wasilewska A, Saczewski F, 
Rybczynska A.

Since clonidine was introduced in clinical practice, attempts are still made to 
obtain substances capable of centrally controlling blood pressure, however with 
pharmacological profile better than currently avail- able, such as moxonidine 
and rilmenidine. Recently synthesized indazole derivatives exert promising 
action on blood pressure and heart rate in Wistar rats. In the present study, 
our aim was to check which of tested substituted compound exerts the best effect 
on basic circulatory parameters. Effects of marsanidine (M), 7-Me- marsanidine 
(7-Me-M), 7-Cl-marsanidine (7-Cl-M) and 7-F-marsanidine (7-F-M) on blood 
pressure, heart rate and diuresis were compared. Male Wistar rats were receiving 
iv. tested compounds in two doses: 10 or 100 pg/kg b.w. Mean arterial pressure 
(MAP), heart rate (HR) and ECG were recorded continuously. Urine samples were 
collected before and after administration of tested imidazolines. Obtained data 
were filtered and subjected to statistical analysis. All tested compounds caused 
a profound decrease of MAP. 7-M-M reduced blood pressure to the highest extent 
when used in 10 μg/kg b.w. dose. 7-F-M in dose of 100 μg/kg b.w. caused the 
strongest drop of MAP. The weakest and the shortest effect in duration was 
observed after M administration. HR was reduced after administration of each 
compound while the strongest effect was observed after 7-M-M administration in 
dose of 10 μg/kg b.w. and after 7-Cl-M administered in dose of 100 μg/kg b.w. 
Again, the weakest and the shortest in duration effect was observed after M 
administration. The highest increase of diuresis was observed after 7-M-M 
administration. These data suggest that methyl substituent in 7 position of 
indazole ring is the most effective in improving hypotensive effects of newly 
synthesized imidazolidine derivatives.

PMID: 29624262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
