1. Kardiologiia. 2019 Apr 17;59(4):52-63. doi: 10.18087/cardio.2019.4.10241.

[Non-Central Influences of α2-Adrenergic and Imidazoline Agonist Interactions in 
Isolated ardiomyocytes Cardiac Cells].

[Article in Russian]

Maltsev AV(1), Kokoz YM(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics, Pushchino Institute of 
Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology.
(2)Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics, Pushchino.

AIM: to investigate the functional interaction of α2-adrenergic and imidazoline 
receptors recently identified on the sarcolemma of isolated cardiomyocytes for 
regulation of the intracellular calcium and the production of the signal 
molecule of nitric oxide (NO).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: experiments were performed on isolated left ventricular 
cardiomyocytes of Wistar rats. Potential-dependent Ca2+-currents were measured 
from the whole-cell by the patch-clamp method in "perforated-patch" 
configuration. The intracellular calcium and the production of nitric oxide were 
estimated from the changes in fluorescence intensity of the Ca2+-specific and 
NO-sensitive dyes at fluorescent or confocal microscope.
RESULTS: It has been shown that α2‑adrenergic and imidazoline receptor agonists 
inhibit L-type Ca2+-currents by themselves, but their effects do not develop 
against each other's background. The blockade of key effector molecules: protein 
kinase B (Akt kinase) for α2‑adrenergic receptors, and protein kinase C for 
imidazoline receptors causes the action of agonists to become additive. Both the 
selective α2‑agonist, guanabenz, and the specific agonist of the first type 
imidazoline receptors, rilmenidine, show an additional inhibition of 
Ca2+-currents against the basal background already reduced by the activation of 
one of the two receptor systems. Wherein rilmenidine increases the level of free 
 Ca2+ in the cytosol, and guanabenz, on the contrary, decreases it. The action 
of guanabenz does not develop against the background of rilmenidine, although 
it, in turn, effectively increases the intracellular level of calcium in 
guanabenz-pretreated cardiac cells. Activation of α2‑adrenergic receptors leads 
to significant stimulation of the endothelial isoform of NO-synthase, and as a 
result to an increase in the NO level. Activation of imidazoline receptors 
itself does not affect NO synthesis but it prevents the production of NO induced 
by α2‑agonists.
CONCLUSION: obtained data make it possible to formulate a number of useful 
recommendations for clinical practice, and also to clarify the non-central 
peripheral effects arising from the activation of α2‑adrenergic or imidazoline 
systems under conditions of endogenous hyperactivation on of the two systems.

DOI: 10.18087/cardio.2019.4.10241
PMID: 31002040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
