1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2019 Sep 24;133(18):1993-2004. doi: 10.1042/CS20190351. Print
 2019 Sep 30.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with long-term cognitive impairment in 
an animal sepsis model.

Manfredini A(1), Constantino L(1), Pinto MC(1), Michels M(1), Burger H(1), Kist 
LW(2)(3), Silva MC(4), Gomes LM(4), Dominguini D(1), Steckert A(1), Simioni 
C(5), Bogo M(2)(3), Streck E(4), Barichello T(6)(7)(8), de Quevedo 
J(6)(7)(9)(10), Singer M(11), Ritter C(1), Dal-Pizzol F(12).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathophysiology, Graduate Program in Health 
Sciences, Health Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina, Criciúma, 
SC, Brazil.
(2)Genomics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Biosciences, Pontifical 
Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Program in Medicine and Health Sciences, Pontifical Catholic 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Bioenergetics, Graduate Program in Health Sciences, Health 
Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(5)Plant Cell Biology Laboratory, Department of Cell Biology, Embryology and 
Genetics, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil.
(6)Translational Psychiatry Program, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Houston, TX, U.S.A.
(7)Center of Excellence on Mood Disorders, Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX, U.S.A.
(8)Laboratory of Experimental Microbiology, Graduate Program in Health Sciences, 
Health Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina, Criciúma, SC, 
Brazil.
(9)Neuroscience Graduate Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, TX, U.S.A.
(10)Laboratory of Neurosciences, Graduate Program in Health Sciences, Health 
Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(11)Bloomsbury Institute of Intensive Care Medicine, Division of Medicine, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(12)Laboratory of Experimental Pathophysiology, Graduate Program in Health 
Sciences, Health Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina, Criciúma, 
SC, Brazil fdpizzol@gmail.com.

Background: Several different mechanisms have been proposed to explain long-term 
cognitive impairment in sepsis survivors. The role of persisting mitochondrial 
dysfunction is not known. We thus sought to determine whether stimulation of 
mitochondrial dynamics improves mitochondrial function and long-term cognitive 
impairment in an experimental model of sepsis.Methods: Sepsis was induced in 
adult Wistar rats by cecal ligation and perforation (CLP). Animals received 
intracerebroventricular injections of either rosiglitazone (biogenesis 
activator), rilmenidine, rapamycin (autophagy activators), or n-saline (sham 
control) once a day on days 7-9 after the septic insult. Cognitive impairment 
was assessed by inhibitory avoidance and object recognition tests. Animals were 
killed 24 h, 3 and 10 days after sepsis with the hippocampus and prefrontal 
cortex removed to determine mitochondrial function.Results: Sepsis was 
associated with both acute (24 h) and late (10 days) brain mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Markers of mitochondrial biogenesis, autophagy and mitophagy were 
not up-regulated during these time points. Activation of biogenesis 
(rosiglitazone) or autophagy (rapamycin and rilmenidine) improved brain ATP 
levels and ex vivo oxygen consumption and the long-term cognitive impairment 
observed in sepsis survivors.Conclusion: Long-term impairment of brain function 
is temporally related to mitochondrial dysfunction. Activators of autophagy and 
mitochondrial biogenesis could rescue animals from cognitive impairment.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20190351
PMID: 31527095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
