1. Pharmacol Rev. 2020 Jan;72(1):50-79. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.016311.

Imidazoline Receptor System: The Past, the Present, and the Future.

Bousquet P(1), Hudson A(1), García-Sevilla JA(1), Li JX(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France (P.B.); 
Department of Pharmacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
(A.H.); Laboratory of Neuropharmacology, University Research Institute on Health 
Sciences, University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Malllorca, Spain 
(J.A.G.-S.); and Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University at 
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York (J.-X.L.).
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France (P.B.); 
Department of Pharmacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
(A.H.); Laboratory of Neuropharmacology, University Research Institute on Health 
Sciences, University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Malllorca, Spain 
(J.A.G.-S.); and Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University at 
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York (J.-X.L.) junxuli@buffalo.edu.

Imidazoline receptors historically referred to a family of nonadrenergic binding 
sites that recognize compounds with an imidazoline moiety, although this has 
proven to be an oversimplification. For example, none of the proposed endogenous 
ligands for imidazoline receptors contain an imidazoline moiety but they are 
diverse in their chemical structure. Three receptor subtypes (I1, I2, and I3) 
have been proposed and the understanding of each has seen differing progress 
over the decades. I1 receptors partially mediate the central hypotensive effects 
of clonidine-like drugs. Moxonidine and rilmenidine have better therapeutic 
profiles (fewer side effects) than clonidine as antihypertensive drugs, thought 
to be due to their higher I1/α 2-adrenoceptor selectivity. Newer I1 receptor 
agonists such as LNP599 
[3-chloro-2-methyl-phenyl)-(4-methyl-4,5-dihydro-3H-pyrrol-2-yl)-amine 
hydrochloride] have little to no activity on α 2-adrenoceptors and demonstrate 
promising therapeutic potential for hypertension and metabolic syndrome. I2 
receptors associate with several distinct proteins, but the identities of these 
proteins remain elusive. I2 receptor agonists have demonstrated various 
centrally mediated effects including antinociception and neuroprotection. A new 
I2 receptor agonist, CR4056 [2-phenyl-6-(1H-imidazol-1yl) quinazoline], 
demonstrated clear analgesic activity in a recently completed phase II clinical 
trial and holds great promise as a novel I2 receptor-based first-in-class 
nonopioid analgesic. The understanding of I3 receptors is relatively limited. 
Existing data suggest that I3 receptors may represent a binding site at the 
Kir6.2-subtype ATP-sensitive potassium channels in pancreatic β-cells and may be 
involved in insulin secretion. Despite the elusive nature of their molecular 
identities, recent progress on drug discovery targeting imidazoline receptors 
(I1 and I2) demonstrates the exciting potential of these compounds to elicit 
neuroprotection and to treat various disorders such as hypertension, metabolic 
syndrome, and chronic pain.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/pr.118.016311
PMID: 31819014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
