1. Front Physiol. 2019 Dec 12;10:1477. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01477. eCollection
 2019.

Potential Therapeutic Use of Neurosteroids for Hypertension.

Head GA(1), Jackson KL(1), Gueguen C(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.

The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) contribution to long-term setting of blood 
pressure (BP) and hence hypertension has been a continuing controversy over many 
decades. However, the contribution of increased sympathetic vasomotor tone to 
the heart, kidney, and blood vessels has been suggested as a major influence on 
the development of high BP which affects 30-40% of the population. This is 
relevant to hypertension associated with chronic stress, being overweight or 
obese as well to chronic kidney disease. Treatments that have attempted to block 
the peripheral aspects of the SNS contribution have included surgery to cut the 
sympathetic nerves as well as agents to block α- and β-adrenoceptors. Other 
treatments, such as centrally acting drugs like clonidine, rilmenidine, or 
moxonidine, activate receptors within the ventrolateral medulla to reduce the 
vasomotor tone overall but have side effects that limit their use. None of these 
treatments target the cause of the enhanced sympathetic tone. Recently we have 
identified an antihypertensive action of the neurosteroid allopregnanolone in a 
mouse model of neurogenic hypertension. Allopregnanolone is known to facilitate 
high-affinity extra-synaptic γ-aminobutyric acid A receptors (GABAAR) through 
allosteric modulation and transcriptional upregulation. The antihypertensive 
effect was specific for increased expression of δ subunits in the amygdala and 
hypothalamus. This focused review examines the possibility that neurosteroids 
may be a novel therapeutic approach to address the neurogenic contribution to 
hypertension. We discuss the causes and prevalence of neurogenic hypertension, 
current therapeutic approaches, and the applicability of using neurosteroids as 
antihypertensive therapy.

Copyright © 2019 Head, Jackson and Gueguen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01477
PMCID: PMC6920208
PMID: 31920690
