1. Elife. 2021 Nov 23;10:e70734. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70734.

Data mining methodology for response to hypertension symptomology-application to 
COVID-19-related pharmacovigilance.

Xu X(1)(2)(3), Kawakami J(1)(4)(5), Millagaha Gedara NI(1)(3)(6), Riviere 
JE(1)(7), Meyer E(1)(4), Wyckoff GJ(1)(4)(5), Jaberi-Douraki M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1DATA Consortium, www.1DATA.life, Olathe, United States.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Kansas State University, Kansas City, United 
States.
(3)Kansas State University Olathe, Olathe, United States.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, United States.
(5)Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological and Chemical 
Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, United States.
(6)Department of Business Economics, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(7)Kansas State University and North Carolina State University, Kansas city, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: Potential therapy and confounding factors including typical 
co-administered medications, patient's disease states, disease prevalence, 
patient demographics, medical histories, and reasons for prescribing a drug 
often are incomplete, conflicting, missing, or uncharacterized in spontaneous 
adverse drug event (ADE) reporting systems. These missing or incomplete features 
can affect and limit the application of quantitative methods in 
pharmacovigilance for meta-analyses of data during randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Data from patients with hypertension were retrieved and integrated from 
the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System; 134 antihypertensive drugs out of 1131 
drugs were filtered and then evaluated using the empirical Bayes geometric mean 
(EBGM) of the posterior distribution to build ADE-drug profiles with an emphasis 
on the pulmonary ADEs. Afterward, the graphical least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator (GLASSO) captured drug associations based on pulmonary ADEs 
by correcting hidden factors and confounder misclassification. Selected drugs 
were then compared using the Friedman test in drug classes and clusters obtained 
from GLASSO.
RESULTS: Following multiple filtering stages to exclude insignificant and 
noise-driven reports, we found that drugs from antihypertensives agents, 
urologicals, and antithrombotic agents (macitentan, bosentan, epoprostenol, 
selexipag, sildenafil, tadalafil, and beraprost) form a similar class with a 
significantly higher incidence of pulmonary ADEs. Macitentan and bosentan were 
associated with 64% and 56% of pulmonary ADEs, respectively. Because these two 
medications are prescribed in diseases affecting pulmonary function and may be 
likely to emerge among the highest reported pulmonary ADEs, in fact, they serve 
to validate the methods utilized here. Conversely, doxazosin and rilmenidine 
were found to have the least pulmonary ADEs in selected drugs from hypertension 
patients. Nifedipine and candesartan were also found by signal detection methods 
to form a drug cluster, shown by several studies an effective combination of 
these drugs on lowering blood pressure and appeared an improved side effect 
profile in comparison with single-agent monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: We consider pulmonary ADE profiles in multiple long-standing groups 
of therapeutics including antihypertensive agents, antithrombotic agents, 
beta-blocking agents, calcium channel blockers, or agents acting on the 
renin-angiotensin system, in patients with hypertension associated with high 
risk for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We found that several individual 
drugs have significant differences between their drug classes and compared to 
other drug classes. For instance, macitentan and bosentan from endothelin 
receptor antagonists show major concern while doxazosin and rilmenidine 
exhibited the least pulmonary ADEs compared to the outcomes of other drugs. 
Using techniques in this study, we assessed and confirmed the hypothesis that 
drugs from the same drug class could have very different pulmonary ADE profiles 
affecting outcomes in acute respiratory illness.
FUNDING: GJW and MJD accepted funding from BioNexus KC for funding on this 
project, but BioNexus KC had no direct role in this article.

© 2021, Xu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70734
PMCID: PMC8754433
PMID: 34812146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: XX, JK, NM, JR, EM, GW, MJ No competing 
interests declared
