1. Neuroscience. 1995 May;66(2):391-402. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)00583-q.

Clonidine and rilmenidine suppress hypotension-induced Fos expression in the 
lower brainstem of the conscious rabbit.

Li YW(1), Dampney RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Our current knowledge of the sites of action of the centrally-acting 
antihypertensive drug clonidine is based almost entirely on experiments in 
anesthetized animals. The aim of this study was to determine, in conscious 
rabbits, the sites of action in the brainstem of systemically administered 
clonidine, as well as its oxazoline analog rilmenidine. Three groups of 
experiments were carried out. In the first group, hypotension was produced by 
continuous intravenous infusion of sodium nitroprusside, at a rate sufficient to 
decrease arterial pressure by 20-30 mmHg, maintained for a period of 60 min. In 
the second and third groups of experiments, sustained hypotension was also 
produced by nitroprusside infusion as in the first group, but this was preceded 
by intravenous injection of clonidine (7-30 micrograms/kg i.v.) or rilmenidine 
(150-300 micrograms/kg i.v.), respectively. In confirmation of our previous 
study [Li Y.-W. and Dampney R. A. L. (1994) Neuroscience 61, 613-634], 
hypotension produced by nitroprusside alone induced a large increase (compared 
to sham control experiments) in the neuronal expression of Fos (a marker of 
neuronal activation) in the nucleus of the solitary tract, area postrema, the 
rostral, intermediate and caudal parts of the ventrolateral medulla, A5 area, 
locus coeruleus and subcoeruleus, and parabrachial nucleus. In comparison with 
this group, in rabbits pretreated with clonidine the numbers of Fos-positive 
cells were greatly reduced (by 76-94%) in the rostral, intermediate and caudal 
parts of the ventrolateral medulla, area postrema, A5 area, locus coeruleus and 
subcoeruleus. Clonidine pretreatment also caused a more moderate reduction (by 
45%) in the number of Fos-positive cells in the nucleus of the solitary tract, 
but had no effect on Fos expression in the parabrachial nucleus. Double-labeling 
for tyrosine hydroxylase and Fos immunoreactivity showed that clonidine 
pretreatment greatly reduced the numbers of both catecholamine and 
non-catecholamine Fos-positive neurons. Rilmenidine pretreatment also greatly 
reduced Fos expression in the lower brainstem, with a very similar pattern to 
that observed after clonidine pretreatment. The results indicate that in 
conscious animals both clonidine and rilmenidine cause a widespread but 
selective inhibition of neurons in the pons and medulla that are normally 
activated by a hypotensive stimulus. In contrast to previous observations in 
anesthetized animals, the results suggest that (i) systemic administration of 
both drugs inhibits non-catecholamine as well as catecholamine neurons in the 
ventrolateral medulla, and (ii) the regional pattern of neuronal inhibition 
following administration of equipotent hypotensive doses of both drugs is very 
similar.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)00583-q
PMID: 7477880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
