1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Jul 12;763:531-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb32447.x.

Importance of imidazoline receptors in the cardiovascular actions of centrally 
acting antihypertensive agents.

Head GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Department of Neuropharmacology, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia.

Increasing evidence indicates that the hypotensive effect of centrally acting 
antihypertensive drugs is not due to stimulation of alpha 2-adrenoceptors but to 
action on imidazoline receptors (IR). This has led to the development and recent 
clinical use of second generation agents such as rilmenidine and moxonidine that 
possess a much greater selectivity toward these nonadrenergic receptors. 
However, relatively few studies have examined the role of these receptors in 
conscious animals or have adequately accounted for the alpha 2-adrenoceptor 
antagonist properties of IR antagonists such as idazoxan. We have taken the 
approach of initially calibrating the alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist potency of 
intracisternally (ic) administered idazoxan and the IR-1 receptor antagonist 
efaroxan against 2-methoxyidazoxan, a highly selective alpha 2-adrenoceptor 
antagonist with little or no imidazoline antagonist effect. This was done using 
alpha-methyldopa, a hypotensive agent affecting only alpha 2-adrenoceptors. 
Thus, we chose doses of the antagonists with equal alpha 2-adrenoceptor blocking 
action such that differences in the ability of idazoxan or efaroxan compared to 
2-methoxy-idazoxan to reverse the hypotension produced by rilmenidine, 
moxonidine, or clonidine indicate an interaction with IR. By this method we 
found that the hypotensive effects of rilmenidine and moxonidine at moderate 
intracisternal doses were more readily reversed by the imidazoline antagonists 
than by 2-methoxy-idazoxan, indicating that IR were largely responsible for 
their hypotensive actions. By contrast, clonidine's effects were equally 
reversed by all antagonists, suggesting interaction mainly with alpha 
2-adrenoceptors. In conscious rabbits with chronic renal sympathetic nerve 
electrodes we examined the effect of rilmenidine and alpha-methyldopa on the 
renal sympathetic baroreflex. Both drugs reduced renal sympathetic nerve 
activity and sympathetic baroreflex responses, but only the effect of 
rilmenidine was preferentially reversed by idazoxan. Thus, both IR and central 
alpha 2-adrenoceptor receptors can influence the renal baroreflex, but the 
former are relatively more important for the actions of rilmenidine. We recently 
examined the possible sites of action of rilmenidine in anesthetized rabbits and 
showed that sixfold lower doses were required to reduce blood pressure when the 
drug was injected into the rostral ventrolateral medulla compared to 
intracisternal administration. At this site rilmenidine also reduced renal 
sympathetic tone and inhibited renal sympathetic baroreflex responses. By 
contrast, rilmenidine was relatively ineffective when injected into the nucleus 
of the solitary tract. These experiments support the view that rilmenidine acts 
primarily at IR in the rostral ventrolateral medulla to reduce sympathetic tone 
and modulate sympathetic baroreflexes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb32447.x
PMID: 7677371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
