1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Jul 12;763:659-72. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb32460.x.

Why imidazoline receptor modulator in the treatment of hypertension?

Schäfer SG(1), Kaan EC, Christen MO, Löw-Kröger A, Mest HJ, Molderings GJ.

Author information:
(1)Solvay Pharma Germany, Hanover.

The influence of the sympathetic nervous system on blood pressure control was 
impressively demonstrated in 1940 by bilateral excision of sympathetic nerve 
fibers. Thereafter, the first generation of drugs lowering blood pressure by 
central modulation of the sympathetic outflow through alpha 2-adrenoceptor for 
stimulation, such as alpha-methyldopa, guanabenz, clonidine, and guanfacine, 
were marketed. However, these compounds were often tolerated poorly, because 
they caused orthostatic hypotension, sedation, tachycardia or bradycardia, dry 
mouth, and reduced cardiac output. The mode of action of the second generation 
centrally acting antihypertensive drugs moxonidine and rilmenidine is different 
from that of the first generation compounds (e.g., clonidine). Contrary to 
clonidine, the newer drugs bind more selectively to I1-imidazoline receptors 
rather than to alpha 2-adrenoceptors where first-generation drugs act. The high 
affinity and selectivity of these two drugs for this recently discovered new 
receptor class make it possible to discriminate between I1-imidazoline 
receptor-mediated blood pressure lowering, on the one hand, and alpha 
2-adrenoceptor-mediated side effects, on the other. Discrimination of the two 
effects was substantiated either by studies using moxonidine alone or in 
interaction experiments with I1-imidazoline receptor or alpha 2-adrenoceptor 
antagonists. The high selectivity of moxonidine at the I1-imidazoline receptor 
allows discrimination between alpha 2-adrenoceptors and I1-imidazoline receptors 
and is reflected in man by the relatively low incidence of adverse drug events 
during moxonidine treatment. Concentration of endazoline, a specific mediator of 
I1-imidazoline receptors, is elevated in some patients with essential 
hypertension. Modulation of I1-imidazoline receptors by moxonidine could be 
interpreted as antagonism with regard to the endogenous agonistic effect of the 
endogenous "transmitter" endazoline. On the other hand, moxonidine acted 
directly as an agonist at the putative I1-imidazoline receptor. Therefore, to 
clear the ground, characterization as well as physiological function of the 
mediator for imidazoline receptors seems essential. The therapeutic relevance of 
using drugs selective for I1-imidazoline receptors for blood pressure reduction 
in hypertensive patients is substantiated by the finding that in human rostral 
ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), which is essential in central blood pressure 
regulation, the relation between alpha 2-adrenoceptors and I1-imidazoline 
receptors is about one to ten (1:10). Reduction of a long-lasting sympathetic 
overdrive may avoid the deteriorating effects on the heart and peripheral 
circulation. These recent findings give a rational explanation for the very low 
incidence of sedation and the absence of respiratory depression, orthostatic 
hypotension, and rebound hypertension that banned the former central acting 
antihypertensive drugs from first-line treatment despite the advantages of 
central mediated blood pressure control.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb32460.x
PMID: 7677385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
