1. Am J Cardiol. 1994 Dec 22;74(13):7A-19A. doi: 10.1016/0002-9149(94)90036-1.

Involvement of imidazoline-preferring receptors in regulation of sympathetic 
tone.

Sannajust F(1), Head GA.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia.

We examined the contribution of imidazoline-preferring receptors (IPR) and alpha 
2-adrenoceptors at different levels of the central nervous system in the 
antihypertensive and sympathoinhibitory actions of rilmenidine in 2 conscious 
animal models, the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) and the normotensive 
rabbit. In conscious SHRs, we compared the potency of rilmenidine and clonidine 
administered intravenously into the lateral cerebral ventricle, the cisterna 
magna, and into the subarachnoidal space of the thoracolumbar spinal cord. In 
SHRs, we found that rilmenidine was more potent and more effective by the 
intrathecal than the intracisternal route. By contrast, clonidine was most 
effective after administration into the cisterna magna. Intravenous 
administration of rilmenidine or clonidine induced dose-dependent and prolonged 
decreases in blood pressure and heart rate. Neither rilmenidine nor clonidine 
altered mean arterial pressure or heart rate when given into the lateral 
cerebral ventricle. These data suggest that in SHRs the spinal cord may be an 
important site for the antihypertensive action of rilmenidine. We therefore 
characterized the receptor type involved. We observed in conscious SHRs that 
intrathecal post-treatment with idazoxan, a mixed alpha 2-adrenoceptor and IPR 
antagonist, abolished the antihypertensive effect of rilmenidine, whereas 
2-methoxyidazoxan, a selective alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist, caused only a 
partial reversal of the blood pressure effects of rilmenidine. These results 
suggest that rilmenidine acts mainly through IPR rather than alpha 
2-adrenoceptors in the spinal cord. In view of these findings, we compared the 
hypotensive actions of rilmenidine and clonidine, administered into the lateral 
cerebral ventricle, the cisterna magna, and the subarachnoid space of the 
thoracolumbar spinal cord in conscious normotensive rabbits. Both drugs were 
less potent and effective when administered intrathecally than intracisternally. 
These experiments suggest that the hypotensive action of rilmenidine and 
clonidine in the rabbit is mediated through receptors mainly located in the 
brainstem. Further, we found that idazoxan reversed the hypotensive action of 
rilmenidine more readily than 2-methoxyidazoxan. Surprisingly, both idazoxan and 
2-methoxyidazoxan completely reversed the depressor effects of clonidine. 
Therefore, in the rabbit, rilmenidine acts through IPR located in the brainstem 
and clonidine acts predominantly through alpha 2-adrenoceptors. In conclusion, 
our studies demonstrate that IPR are involved in the vasodepressor action of 
rilmenidine in both conscious SHRs and rabbits. However, although the main site 
of action of rilmenidine in SHRs may be located in the thoracolumbar spinal 
cord, in the rabbit it appears to be in the brainstem.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9149(94)90036-1
PMID: 7998588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
