1. Neuroscience. 1994 Apr;59(3):589-98. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)90179-1.

Imidazoline receptors, non-adrenergic idazoxan binding sites and alpha 
2-adrenoceptors in the human central nervous system.

De Vos H(1), Bricca G, De Keyser J, De Backer JP, Bousquet P, Vauquelin G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Chemistry, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, St. 
Genesius-Rode, Belgium.

Both [3H]clonidine and [3H]idazoxan bind to alpha 2 adrenoceptors. The former 
also labels imidazoline receptors, and the latter non-adrenergic idazoxan 
binding sites. In order to investigate whether the imidazoline receptors and 
non-adrenergic idazoxan binding sites are identical, we compared the binding 
characteristics of [3H]clonidine and [3H]idazoxan to these sites by radioligand 
binding experiments on ultra-thin slices and homogenates of human striatum. A 
good correlation was found between the effect of different ions on the binding 
characteristics of [3H]clonidine and [3H]idazoxan, and the affinities of most 
competing drugs. However, clonidine and rilmenidine displayed a 100- and 10-fold 
lower affinity, respectively, for the idazoxan binding sites than for the 
imidazoline receptors. Autoradiography with [3H]clonidine showed that high 
densities of imidazoline receptors were present in the striatum, pallidum, gyrus 
dentatus of the hippocampus, amygdala, and substantia nigra. Moderate densities 
were found throughout the cerebral cortex, thalamus and several brainstem nuclei 
including the nucleus olivarius inferior. Low densities were seen in the 
cerebellum, spinal cord and pituitary gland. As for the non-adrenergic sites 
labelled by [3H]idazoxan, the imidazoline receptors can be found in all major 
brain areas examined. However, there are some striking differences between the 
concentrations of imidazoline receptors and non-adrenergic idazoxan binding 
sites in certain brain regions. To reconcile distribution and pharmacologic 
data, we propose that imidazoline receptors and non-adrenergic idazoxan binding 
sites represent different proteins or protein complexes and that at least in the 
nucleus reticularis lateralis and the striatum, imidazoline receptors and 
non-adrenergic idazoxan binding sites may be physically associated. The regional 
distribution of alpha 2 adrenoceptors within the human CNS was determined by 
quantitative autoradiography with [3H]RX821002. The highest densities of alpha 2 
adrenoceptors were found in the cerebral and cerebellar cortex, and certain 
regions in the medulla oblongata (floor of the IV ventricle, reticular 
formation, hypoglossal nucleus and nucleus olivarius inferior). No alpha 2 
adrenoceptors were detected in the pituitary gland. There exists no relationship 
between the distribution pattern of imidazoline receptors and alpha 2 
adrenoceptors, indicating that these binding sites are independent from each 
other.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)90179-1
PMID: 8008210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
