1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Sep;266(3):1556-62.

Renal effects of rilmenidine in anesthetized rats: importance of renal nerves.

Kline RL(1), Cechetto DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Renal function studies using standard clearance techniques were done in control 
and rilmenidine-infused (20 micrograms/Kg/min i.v. for 80 min) Wistar rats 
anesthetized with Inactin. The role of renal sympathetic nerves in the action of 
rilmenidine was assessed using rats in which the left kidney was denervated 7 to 
10 days before the experiment. In other experiments, renal sympathetic nerve 
activity was recorded during infusion of rilmenidine. Arterial pressure and 
heart rate were decreased significantly by rilmenidine but changes in arterial 
pressure were limited to 10 to 12 mm Hg by ligating the proximal aorta during 
infusion of rilmenidine. Under these conditions, rilmenidine did not alter 
glomerular filtration rate significantly, but renal blood flow increased 
significantly in both innervated and denervated kidneys. Urine flow, total and 
fractional sodium excretion, and clearance of osmoles increased significantly in 
innervated kidneys but not in denervated kidneys. Free water clearance was 
decreased significantly, but only in the innervated kidney. Potassium excretion 
and fractional potassium excretion were increased significantly in both kidneys, 
although the change was larger in the innervated kidneys. Rilmenidine decreased 
renal sympathetic nerve activity progressively until by 80 min nerve activity 
was essentially absent. The data indicate that rilmenidine increases renal blood 
flow and potassium excretion by a mechanism independent of renal nerves, whereas 
the natriuresis and diuresis is dependent upon intact renal nerves. The increase 
in fractional excretion of sodium was associated with a marked decrease in renal 
sympathetic nerve activity suggesting that the natriuresis is caused by 
decreased tubular reabsorption of sodium subsequent to a central action of 
rilmenidine.

PMID: 8103796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
