1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1995;26 Suppl 2:S7-16.

Baroreflexes and cardiovascular regulation in hypertension.

Head GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Department of Neuropharmacology, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia.

The primary purpose of the arterial baroreflex is to keep blood pressure close 
to a particular set point over a relatively short period of time. The rapid 
resetting of arterial baroreceptor afferents toward any sustained new level of 
blood pressure ensures that the reflex acts as an effective buffer of short-term 
blood pressure fluctuations that accompany daily life but also ensures that 
arterial baroreflexes play little role in setting the long-term level of blood 
pressure. Nevertheless, the minimization of blood pressure variability by 
baroreflex mechanisms is important as studies suggest that a diminished 
baroreflex is an independent risk factor or sudden death after myocardial 
infarction. In hypertensive humans and animals, the baroreflex control of heart 
rate is diminished. Using the steady-state method for assessment of the cardiac 
baroreflex in rats, we have shown that the change in baroreflex sensitivity is 
due to a reduction in the vagal range. Although the cardiac sympathetic 
component of the baroreflex is normal, the level of cardiac sympathetic activity 
is enhanced, particularly in young hypertensive rats. We have shown that there 
is a stronger inverse relationship between vagal heart rate range and levels of 
cardiac hypertrophy than with other variables, such as blood pressure, 
hypertension, or indexes of vascular hypertrophy. Treatments that reduce cardiac 
hypertrophy restore cardiac vagal function. Centrally acting antihypertensive 
agents increase the sensitivity of vagal baroreceptor heart rate reflexes, 
mainly through an action on central alpha 2-adrenoceptors. They also reduce 
cardiac sympathetic activity and diminish cardiac sympathetic baroreflexes 
through a non-alpha 2-adrenoceptor, possibly an imidazoline receptor mechanism. 
Both of these effects are beneficial in hypertension, where cardiac sympathetic 
function is enhanced and vagal activity is reduced. Thus, these actions would be 
expected to cause a desirable reduction in blood pressure variability. The 
effect of hypertension on baroreflex control of sympathetic vasomotor function 
is less clear. Studies have shown diminished, normal, and enhanced sympathetic 
vasomotor baroreflex control. Basal renal sympathetic drive, however, appears to 
be increased in human essential hypertension. Our studies in conscious rabbits 
have shown that rilmenidine reduces renal sympathetic baroreflex function. 
Rilmenidine acts principally at the level of the rostral ventrolateral medullary 
imidazoline receptors to markedly reduce the basal renal sympathetic nerve 
activity and the maximum response to transient fluctuations in blood pressure. 
Thus, in addition to their antihypertensive actions, centrally acting agents, 
such as rilmenidine, reduce cardiac and renal sympathetic baroreflex responses 
and increase cardiac vagal baroreflex sensitivity. This provides an ideal 
profile of action for the restoration of baroreflex function in addition to 
reversal of cardiac and vascular hypertrophy in hypertension.

PMID: 8642810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
