1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1995;26 Suppl 2:S34-9.

Lipid profile and antihypertensive efficacy in hyperlipidemic hypertensive 
patients: comparison of rilmenidine and captopril.

Scemama M(1), Février B, Beucler I, Dairou F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier, Courbevoie, France.

In hypertensive patients with lipid abnormalities, an ideal antihypertensive 
agent would control blood pressure without interfering with lipid metabolism. 
The aim of the present study was to assess whether in addition to 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, calcium antagonists, and alpha 
1-antagonists, rilmenidine (RIL), the first antihypertensive drug that is 
selective to imidazoline receptors, fulfills these requirements. To assess the 
effects of RIL (daily doses of 1 mg o.d. or b.i.d.) in comparison to captopril 
(CAP) (doses of 25 or 50 mg b.i.d.), an 8-week, double-blind, randomized, 
parallel-group study was carried out. Fifty-one patients (mean age: 56.3 +/- 1.5 
years) with mild-to-moderate hypertension (supine systolic/diastolic blood 
pressure, 165.1 +/- 2.0/99.1 +/- 0.6 mm Hg) and type 2a or 2b hyperlipidemia 
(low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol: 5.38 +/- 0.16 mmol/L) were included 
in the study, and they were followed by their general practitioner at 4-week 
intervals. Twenty-six patients received RIL, and 25 received CAP. The permanence 
of hypercholesterolemia was checked twice before inclusion into the study, at 
3-week intervals, for patients who had already been on a hypocholesterolemic 
diet for 6 weeks. Plasma lipid evaluation included total, LDL and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, triglycerides, apolipoproteins A1 and B, 
lipoprotein (a), and, last, a uric acid assay. Assays were centralized at the 
Lipid Laboratory, CHU Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris. In each group, 1 patient 
withdrew from the study for personal reasons, and four patients required a dose 
adjustment (double dose) at the week 4 visit. After 8 weeks of therapy, systolic 
blood pressure decreased significantly in both groups, with no statistically 
significant difference between groups (RIL, 20.5 mm Hg; CAP, 21.3 mm Hg; NS). 
Diastolic blood pressure also decreased (RIL, 13.9 mm Hg; CAP, 15.1 mm Hg; NS). 
No difference between groups was observed on the changes of lipid parameters 
between week 0 and week 8 visits. No severe adverse event occurred other than an 
asymptomatic atrial fibrillation in a CAP group patient at week 8. This study 
provides evidence that over a follow-up period of 8 weeks, both RIL and CAP are 
efficient and well-tolerated drugs in the first-line treatment of hypertensive 
patients with lipid abnormalities.

PMID: 8642803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
