1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1995;26 Suppl 2:S48-54.

Effects of rilmenidine and clonidine on the electroencephalogram, saccadic eye 
movements, and psychomotor function.

Harron DW(1), Hasson B, Regan M, McClelland RJ, King DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain. United Arab Emirates.

Rilmenidine is a novel oxazoline derivative that is effective in the treatment 
of hypertension. Studies in animals have indicated that rilmenidine may reduce 
blood pressure without the associated central alpha 2 side effects of clonidine. 
The aim of this double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled study was to 
evaluate the hypotensive and central sedative effects of single oral doses of 
rilmenidine (1 or 2 mg), clonidine (150 or 300 micrograms), and lorazepam (2.5 
mg) in 12 healthy male volunteers. Drug effects were assessed with a test 
battery composed of resting electroencephalogram, auditory evoked responses 
(AERs), saccadic eye movements, psychomotor performance, and subjective ratings 
as well as blood pressure and heart rate. Rilmenidine and clonidine produced 
similar dose-dependent reductions in blood pressure without an effect on heart 
rate. Saccadic eye movements were not significantly impaired after rilmenidine 
(1 mg) treatment in contrast to after clonidine (150 micrograms) treatment. Peak 
saccadic velocity was impaired by all drugs except rilmenidine (1 mg), which was 
indistinguishable from placebo. The electroencephalographic spectral analysis 
also demonstrated greater sedation with lorazepam than with the other drugs and 
greater vigilance with placebo and rilmenidine (1 mg) than with lorazepam. AERs 
showed a differentiation in sedative effects between lorazepam and clonidine 
(300 micrograms) relative to placebo, rilmenidine (1 mg), and clonidine (150 
micrograms). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that at lower 
doses, rilmenidine may act preferentially through imidazoline receptors, whereas 
at higher doses, alpha 2-adrenoceptors may become activated.

PMID: 8642806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
