1. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1996 Jun;10 Suppl 1:283-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00120498.

Modulation of sympathetic outflow by centrally acting antihypertensive drugs.

van Zwieten PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

The modulation of peripheral sympathetic activity by the central nervous system 
(CNS) has been intensely investigated as a potential target of antihypertensive 
drugs. In particular, clonidine, guanfacine, and alpha-methyl-DOPA (acting via 
its metabolite alpha-methylnoradrenaline) have been developed as 
antihypertensives with a predominantly CNS site of action. Initially these drugs 
have been assumed to reduce elevated blood pressure via the stimulation of 
central alpha2-adrenoceptors in the brain stem, thus leading to peripheral 
sympathoinhibition and a reduction of elevated blood pressure, heart rate, and 
plasma catecholamines. In a later stage it has been recognized that central 
imidazoline (I1) receptors, probably located in the nucleus reticularis 
lateralis in the medullary region, may also be the target of centrally acting 
antihypertensives. Moxonidine and rilmenidine are the prototypes of such agents. 
Accordingly, the receptor profile of the various types of centrally acting 
antihypertensives may be characterized as follows: alpha-methyl-DOPA, alpha2 
(through alpha-methylnoradrenaline); clonidine alpha2 + I1 (mixed agonist); and 
moxonidine, rilmenidine, I1 > alpha2. The various compounds mentioned will thus 
cause peripheral sympathoinhibition, initiated by different receptor targets in 
the CNS. Finally, the peripheral alpha1-blocker, urapidil, has been demonstrated 
to possess an additional central mechanism, mediated by the stimulation of 
serotonergic 5HT1A-receptors located in the rostral ventrolateral medulla. The 
stimulation of these 5HT1A-receptors appears to suppress, via the autonomic 
nervous system, the reflex tachycardia triggered by vasodilation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00120498
PMID: 8827951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
