1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1996;27 Suppl 3:S49-54. doi: 
10.1097/00005344-199627003-00007.

Aspects of tolerability of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs.

Webster J(1), Koch HF.

Author information:
(1)Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Foresterhill, Scotland.

Traditional centrally acting antihypertensives have been associated with a high 
incidence of adverse effects and are no longer recommended as first-line 
therapy. The newer imidazoline receptor agonists must overcome this reputation 
if they are to gain recognition as potential first-line agents for hypertension. 
Methyldopa, a centrally acting alpha(2)-agonist, is characterized by a number of 
serious adverse reactions that limit its use. Although unpredictable 
idiosyncratic or hypersensitivity reactions are uncommon, these include 
hepatitis, myocarditis, and hemolytic anaemia. Less serious problems such as 
abnormal liver function tests, positive Coombs test, drug-induced fever, and 
pancreatitis also occur. Central side effects include drowsiness, fatigue, 
lethargy, sedation, depression, psychotic reactions, nasal stuffiness, 
impotence, and exacerbation of Parkinsonism. In hypertensive men, methyldopa is 
less well tolerated than either captopril or propranolol, and up to 20% of 
patients discontinue therapy because of adverse effects. Clonidine acts 
primarily as an alpha(2)-agonist but also acts as an agonist at imidazoline 
receptors in the rostroventrolateral medulla. It is equipotent to most other 
antihypertensives but is considerably less well-tolerated in comparative trials. 
The principal adverse effects of clonidine are drowsiness, sedation, lethargy 
and dry mouth. Reserpine acts primarily by depleting central catecholamine 
neurotransmitter stores. It was very extensively used in early hypertension 
trials, but its central side effects of sedation, nasal stuffiness, and severe 
depression are now considered so undesirable that the drug is seldom prescribed. 
The imidazoline (I1) agonists moxonidine and rilmenidine act selectively and 
have very little central alpha(2)-agonist activity. In comparative studies 
against placebo and other reference antihypertensives, the only adverse effect 
consistently associated with these drugs was dry mouth (approximate 
placebo-corrected incidence 10%). Sedation was not pronounced. Withdrawal 
syndromes are complex pathophysiologic processes and occur with a variety of 
antihypertensive drugs. Cessation of therapy with clonidine and, to a lesser 
extent, methyldopa may result in a severe withdrawal syndrome characterized by 
restlessness, sweating, anxiety, tremor, palpitations, and headache. There may 
be a rapid rise in blood pressure, often with a true "rebound" to higher than 
pretreatment levels. Plasma and urinary catecholamine levels are increased, and 
fatalities have been reported. It is important to stress that such a syndrome 
has not been recorded, in animal or human studies, with either moxonidine or 
rilmenidine.

DOI: 10.1097/00005344-199627003-00007
PMID: 8872299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
