1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1996;27 Suppl 3:S5-10.

From alpha and beta to I1: an overview of sympathetic receptors involved in 
blood pressure control targets for drug treatment.

van Zwieten PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

There is no doubt that the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) plays an important 
role in the pathogenesis and maintenance of hypertensive disease, although many 
details concerning this association remain to be clarified. Over the years, 
several types of antihypertensive drugs have been developed that can impair SNS 
activity at virtually all levels of the system. Alpha and beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonists, postganglionic sympathetic neuron blockers and ganglioplegic agents 
are well-known examples of drugs with a predominantly peripheral activity. The 
CNS regulation of peripheral sympathetic activity offers a further possibility 
to counteract the influence of SNS activity. In particular, central 
catecholaminergic neurons and alpha-adrenoceptors have been analyzed in detail 
and are recognized as important targets for the classic centrally acting 
antihypertensives clonidine, guanfacine, and alpha-methyldopa. Initially, these 
drugs were assumed to reduce elevated blood pressure via the stimulation of 
central alpha-adrenoceptors in the brainstem, thus leading to peripheral 
sympathoinhibition and a reduction of elevated blood pressure, heart rate, and 
plasma catecholamines. In a later stage it has been recognized that central 
imidazoline (I1) receptors may also be involved in the central regulation of 
peripheral sympathetic activity and that they act as a target for centrally 
acting antihypertensives. Moxonidine and rilmenidine are the prototypes of such 
agents. Accordingly, the receptor profile of the various types of centrally 
acting antihypertensives can be characterized as follows: alpha-methyl-DOPA 
(through alpha-methyl-norepinephrine) alpha 2; clonidine (mixed agonist), alpha 
2 + I1; moxonidine, rilmenidine, I1 > alpha 2. The various compounds mentioned 
will thus cause peripheral sympathoinhibition, initiated by different receptor 
targets in the CNS. Because most of the adverse reactions to clonidine and 
related drugs are mediated by central alpha-adrenoceptors, is is hoped that the 
imidazoline receptor agonists (moxonidine, rilmenidine) will show a more 
favorable pattern of side effects.

PMID: 8872294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
