1. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 1996 Oct-Nov;23(10-11):845-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1681.1996.tb01132.x.

Current status of putative imidazoline (I1) receptors and renal mechanisms in 
relation to their antihypertensive therapeutic potential.

Evans RG(1).

Author information:
(1)Emily EE Stewart Renal Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia.

1. A 'second generation' of centrally acting antihypertensive agents has 
recently been developed. Unlike the 'first generation' of these agents (e.g. 
alpha-methyldopa, clonidine, guanabenz), which act predominantly by an agonist 
action at a alpha 2-adrenoceptors, these agents (e.g. rilmenidine, moxonidine) 
are believed to exert their antihypertensive effects chiefly by an interaction 
at putative imidazoline (I) receptors of the I1-type, and so have a reduced 
profile of alpha 2-adrenoceptor-mediated side effects. There is also evidence 
from studies in experimental animals that activation of I1-receptors mediates a 
natriuretic effect. This review evaluates the evidence that they mediate renal 
effects different from those of alpha 2-adrenoceptors that could contribute to 
their long-term efficacy. 2. Data from binding studies suggest that I1-binding 
sites are heterogeneous. There is conflicting evidence concerning whether any of 
these binding sites are truly receptors. Indeed, the best evidence for the 
existence of I1-receptors comes from in vivo experiments indicating that 
imidazoline compounds act at non-adrenoceptor receptive sites in the central 
nervous system to reduce sympathetic drive and blood pressure. 3. There are a 
wide range of potential sites and mechanisms through which centrally acting 
antihypertensive agents can affect renal function, including actions mediated 
within the central nervous system, heart, systemic circulation and within the 
kidneys themselves. 'First generation' centrally acting antihypertensive agents 
cause diuresis and natriuresis in rats, while in dogs and humans a diuresis is 
often seen with variable effects on sodium excretion. 4. Evidence from studies 
in anaesthetized rats indicates that rilmenidine and moxonidine can promote 
sodium excretion by interacting with both central nervous system and renal 
putative I1-receptors. This does not appear to necessarily be the case in other 
species. At this time there are few or no published data from clinical studies 
to suggest that 'second generation' centrally acting antihypertensive agents 
affect salt and water balance differently from 'first generation' agents.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1681.1996.tb01132.x
PMID: 8911724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
