1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1997 Jan;15(1):S3-8.

Centrally acting antihypertensives: a renaissance of interest. Mechanisms and 
haemodynamics.

van Zwieten PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Classic centrally acting antihypertensives are known to stimulate 
alpha2-adrenoceptors located in the pontomedullary region, in the vicinity of 
the nucleus tractus solitarii, vasomotor centre, vagal nucleus and the various 
interconnecting neurones. The stimulation of these central alpha2-adrenoceptors 
induces peripheral sympathoinhibition and hence a reduction in (elevated) blood 
pressure, predominantly as a result of vasodilation and a consequent decrease in 
peripheral vascular resistance.
ANTIHYPERTENSIVES: Clonidine, guanfacine, guanabenz and alpha-methyldopa (via 
its active metabolite alpha-methylnoradrenaline) are well-known examples of 
classic centrally acting antihypertensives. They are effective antihypertensives 
with an attractive haemodynamic profile. However, these agents have lost much of 
their clinical interest because of their subjectively unpleasant side-effects 
(sedation, dry mouth, impotence). Since these side-effects are also mediated, to 
a major extent, by alpha2-adrenoceptors it is virtually impossible to separate 
the desired centrally induced antihypertensive effect and the adverse reactions 
by designing new compounds.
DRUG TARGETS: I1-Imidazoline receptors have recently been discovered as a new 
target of centrally acting antihypertensives. When stimulated with agonists the 
I1-imidazoline receptors, located in the nucleus reticularis lateralis will 
trigger peripheral sympathoinhibition, following similar pathways as involved in 
the effects of the classic alpha2-adrenoceptor stimulants. Moxonidine and 
rilmenidine are I1-imidazoline receptor stimulants with little affinity for 
alpha2-adrenoceptors. Accordingly, such agents lower elevated blood pressure in 
a similar manner as the aforementioned older drugs, but it may be hoped that 
their side-effect profile is more favourable.
CONCLUSION: Accordingly, it would now be possible to separate the attractive 
haemodynamic properties and the side-effects of centrally acting 
antihypertensives.

PMID: 9050980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
