1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1997 Mar 19;322(2-3):191-9. doi:
10.1016/s0014-2999(97)00009-5.

Pretreatment with quinpirole inhibits the central antihypertensive effects of 
rilmenidine and alpha-methyldopa in conscious rats.

Van den Buuse M(1).

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, Victoria, Australia. 
maarten.vandenbuuse@baker.edu.au

Treatment of conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) with the dopamine 
D2 receptor agonist quinpirole causes a short-lasting pressor response and 
apparent desensitisation to the effects of subsequent injections of quinpirole 
or central antihypertensives such as clonidine. In the present study, a number 
of aspects of this apparent desensitisation were investigated. Thirty minutes 
after intravenous injection of quinpirole into spontaneously hypertensive rats, 
treatment with the dopamine D2 receptors antagonist raclopride caused a 
significant fall in blood pressure. At this time point, circulating levels of 
vasopressin were not significantly different compared to controls. In 
Brattleboro rats, the pressor response to quinpirole was reduced in the first 15 
min after injection, but not difference in blood pressure was observed at later 
time points. In SHR which had been treated with quinpirole, the central 
antihypertensive effects of rilmenidine or alpha-methyldopa were significantly 
inhibited. By contrast, the bradycardia induced by these drugs was similar in 
quinpirole-treated rats and controls. Quinpirole pretreatment caused an 
enhancement of the hypotension but a reduction of the reflex tachycardia after 
intravenous treatment with hydralazine. In SHR treated with methylatropine and 
quinpirole, the upper plateau of the sympathetic baroreceptor-heart rate reflex 
curve was reduced. These results show that treatment with quinpirole has marked 
effects on central sympathetic vasomotor mechanisms which are the target of 
antihypertensive drugs such as rilmenidine and alpha-methyldopa. At least some 
of these effects may occur at the level of the sympathetic baroreflex. Moreover, 
while the effects of quinpirole on sympathetic regulation are prolonged, the 
initial pressor response is counteracted by an as yet unidentified compensatory 
mechanism which can be unmasked when quinpirole is displaced from its receptor 
by dopamine D2 receptor antagonist treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(97)00009-5
PMID: 9098687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
