1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1998 Aug;16(3):S39-43.

Preventive effect of rilmenidine on the occurrence of neurogenic ventricular 
arrhythmias in rabbits.

Roegel JC(1), Yannoulis N, De Jong W, Feldman J, Bousquet P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire et Rénale, CNRS ERS 109, 
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: Centrally acting antihypertensive drugs bearing an imidazoline or a 
related chemical structure inhibit sympathetic nervous output to the heart and 
vascular beds, and enhance parasympathetic tone. Cardiac ischaemia and 
ventricular arrhythmias that can result from hypertension are likely to benefit 
from such effects.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of rilmenidine, an oxazoline with 
antihypertensive properties, in a model of neurogenically induced ischaemic 
ventricular arrhythmias.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Bicuculline, a alpha-aminobutyric acid (GABA(A)) receptor 
antagonist, was administered intracisternally in pentobarbitone anaesthetized 
rabbits; 10 microg/kg intracisternal bicuculline induced polymorphic ventricular 
ectopic beats and ventricular tachycardia, while blood pressure increased by 
about 50-60% and heart rate in sinus rhythm decreased by about 20%. Rilmenidine 
pretreatment (10 min), either administered intravenously (0.01, 0.1, 1 mg/kg) or 
intracisternally (3, 10, 30 microg/kg), dose-dependently prevented the 
occurrence of bicuculline-induced arrhythmias and, because of a lower baseline, 
the blood pressure values reached were less when compared with controls. 
Intracisternal idazoxan (15 microg/kg) had no significant antiarrhythmic effect 
but antagonized, in part, the haemodynamic and antiarrhythmic effects of 
rilmenidine (1 mg/kg intravenously; 30 microg/kg intracisternally).
CONCLUSION: The antiarrhythmic effects observed with rilmenidine are mainly 
mediated by blunting the bicuculline-induced increase in the sympathetic nervous 
output to the heart and the vascular beds. These effects of rilmenidine are 
likely to originate from action on the central as well as on the peripheral 
nervous systems. Direct coronary or cardiac effects might also play a role, in 
particular at low non-hypotensive intravenous doses.

PMID: 9747909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
