1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1998 Aug;16(3):S19-24.

High blood pressure management: potential benefits of I1 agents.

Esler M(1).

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM AND HYPERTENSION: Biochemical, electrophysiological, 
pharmacological and haemodynamic findings support the existence of sympathetic 
nervous system activation in primary human hypertension. Analysis of regional 
sympathetic nervous system function, using both neurophysiological methods for 
measuring sympathetic nerve firing rates, and neurochemical techniques for 
quantifying regional noradrenaline spillover to plasma has demonstrated 
activation of the sympathetic nervous outflows to the heart, the kidneys, and 
skeletal muscle vasculature, particularly in younger patients. The initiating 
cause of this sympathetic nervous stimulation is unknown, but estimation of 
central nervous system noradrenaline turnover in hypertensive patients, using 
measurements of the washout of noradrenaline and its lipophilic metabolites into 
the internal jugular veins, indicates that activation of forebrain pressor 
noradrenergic nuclei is the probable underlying mechanism. CONSEQUENCES OF 
INCREASED SYMPATHETIC ACTIVITY: The sympathetic activation present in human 
hypertension no doubt contributes to the blood pressure elevation, and is a 
legitimate target for therapeutic intervention with imidazoline receptor-binding 
agents such as rilmenidine. In addition, the sympathetic nervous activation 
seems to have adverse consequences in hypertensive patients beyond initiating 
the blood pressure elevation. There is evidence that neural vasoconstriction has 
metabolic effects, in skeletal muscle impairing glucose delivery to muscle, 
causing insulin resistance and hyperinsulinaemia, and in liver retarding 
postprandial clearing of lipids, contributing to hyperlipidaemia. Cardiac 
sympathetic activation is demonstrably a cause of sudden death in heart failure 
patients; a comparable arrhythmogenic effect is probable in hypertension. A 
trophic effect of sympathetic activation on cardiovascular growth is also 
likely, contributing to the development of left ventricular hypertrophy. 
Rilmenidine, through its central nervous system actions, has been demonstrated 
to powerfully reduce sympathetic nervous activity in essential hypertension 
patients. INHIBITING THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM: As the clinical consequences of 
sympathetic nervous activation in essential hypertension appear to go beyond 
that of hypertension pathogenesis, extending to a causal influence in 
atherosclerosis development, cardiovascular hypertrophy and cardiac arrhythmias, 
it is possible that, of all antihypertensive drugs, those inhibiting the 
sympathetic nervous system might best reduce cardiovascular risk. This remains 
to be tested.

PMID: 9747906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
