1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1998 Aug;16(3):S7-12.

Site and receptors involved in the sympathoinhibitory actions of rilmenidine.

Head GA(1), Burke SL, Chan CK.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia. Geoff.Head@Baker.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: It is well accepted that centrally acting antihypertensive agents 
such as rilmenidine reduce blood pressure through inhibition of the sympathetic 
nervous system. The central receptor involved, be it a central imidazoline 
receptor or an alpha2-adrenoceptor and its location, is less certain.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The present paper reviews studies from our laboratory 
examining these questions by using antagonists with differing affinity for 
imidazoline receptors and alpha2-adrenoceptors. In addition, we have used 
various routes of administration in conscious and anaesthetized normotensive 
rabbits. We found that rilmenidine was more potent in its hypotensive action 
when administered into the fourth ventricle than when given intravenously and 
considerably more potent when injected into the rostroventrolateral medulla 
(RVLM) compared to the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS). By contrast, 
alpha-methylnoradrenaline, which acts solely through alpha2-adrenoceptors to 
produce hypotension, was similarly potent in both the NTS and RVLM. Injections 
of rilmenidine into the RVLM reduced renal sympathetic tone and produced a 
marked inhibition of renal sympathetic baroreflex responses. The pattern of 
renal sympathetic baroreflex effects of rilmenidine administered into the RVLM 
was similar to the effects of the fourth ventricular or intravenous 
administration. These studies together support the view that the RVLM is the 
major site of action. We have determined the relative importance of imidazoline 
receptors and alpha2-adrenoceptors in the inhibition of renal sympathetic nerve 
activity produced by rilmenidine administered into the RVLM, the fourth 
ventricle or intravenously. Initial studies in conscious rabbits showed that 
intravenous or fourth ventricular administration of rilmenidine induced renal 
sympatho-inhibition which was preferentially reversed by idazoxan or efaroxan 
(imidazoline/alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist) compared to 2-methoxyidazoxan 
(alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist). In anaesthetized rabbits, administration of 
idazoxan into the RVLM reversed the inhibition of the renal sympathetic activity 
induced by RVLM or intravenous administration of rilmenidine. In contrast, 
idazoxan had no effect on the responses produced by the alpha2-adrenoceptor 
agonist alpha-methylnoradrenaline.
CONCLUSION: Our studies suggest that rilmenidine given systemically acts 
primarily on imidazoline receptors in the RVLM to reduce sympathetic tone and to 
modulate sympathetic baroreflexes.

PMID: 9747904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
