1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1998 Aug;16(3):S51-4.

Sympatho-adrenal mechanisms regulating cardiovascular hypertrophy in primary 
hypertension: a role for rilmenidine?

Bobik A(1), Dilley R, Kanellakis P.

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Overactivity of the sympatho-adrenal system has long been considered 
a major factor contributing to blood pressure elevation in primary hypertension 
in humans and experimental animals. Our aim has been to elucidate its role in 
the development of cardiovascular hypertrophy in hypertensives.
METHODS: Two studies have been performed in spontaneously hypertensive rats 
(SHR). One involved irreversible inhibition of the sympatho-adrenal system in 
newborn SHR using a sympathectomy procedure combined with prolonged 
alpha1-adrenoceptor blockade. The other involved reversible, long-term 
inhibition of the sympatho-adrenal system in young but mature SHR, by treatment 
with rilmenidine, a centrally active antihypertensive agent interacting with 
imidazoline receptors. Their effects on cardiovascular structure were examined.
RESULTS: Sympathectomy plus alpha1-adrenoceptor blockade prevented the 
development of cardiac and vascular hypertrophy in adolescent SHR and these 
effects were maintained later in life. Rilmenidine administered to older 
(9-week) SHR also attenuated cardiac hypertrophy, abolished perivascular 
fibrosis associated with the intramyocardial vessels, and normalized vessel 
structure in the richly sympathetically innervated mesenteric vasculature. These 
effects were only partially related to the level of blood pressure reduction.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of the sympatho-adrenal system not only reduces blood 
pressure to normotensive levels in SHR but also has beneficial effects on 
cardiovascular structure, potentially reducing risk factors for cardiac and 
renal abnormalities frequently seen in long-term hypertensives. Therapeutically, 
these effects are likely to be achieved with rilmenidine.

PMID: 9747911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
