1. J Hypertens Suppl. 1998 Aug;16(3):S1-5.

I1-imidazoline receptors: an update.

Bousquet P(1), Dontenwill M, Greney H, Feldman J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire et Rénale, CNRS ERS 109, 
Faculté de Médecine, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: The site of the hypotensive action of imidazoline compounds, such as 
clonidine, was first identified within the nucleus reticularis lateralis of the 
rostroventrolateral part of the medulla (NRL/RVLM). It was shown that 
imidazolines and related substances reduced blood pressure when applied in this 
area whereas no catecholamine was capable of such an effect. 
IMIDAZOLINE-SPECIFIC BINDING: We previously suggested the existence of receptors 
specific for imidazoline-like compounds that differed from the alpha-adrenergic 
receptors. Imidazoline-binding sites were subsequently reported in the brain and 
in a variety of peripheral tissues, including the human kidney, and as expected 
these specific binding sites do not bind the catecholamines. The 
imidazoline-binding sites are classified into two subgroups: the I1-type, which 
is sensitive to clonidine and idazoxan, and the I2-type, sensitive to idazoxan 
and largely insensitive to clonidine. Numerous studies have confirmed the 
involvement of these receptors in various regulations and pathological 
processes, hypertension being the most notable.
DRUGS: Functional studies have confirmed that the hypotensive effects of 
clonidine-like drugs involve I1-imidazoline receptors while their most frequent 
side effects only involve alpha2-adrenergic receptors. Recent studies have shown 
that a contribution of both receptor types might be necessary to trigger the 
hypotensive effect of central origin. Rilmenidine, an oxazoline analogue to the 
imidazolines, has been proposed as the prototype of a new class of 
antihypertensive drugs selective for I1-imidazoline receptors. At hypotensive 
doses, this drug is devoid of any significant sedative effect. As with 
clonidine, it evokes hypotension when injected into the NRL region and it 
completely displaces the [3H]clonidine bound to specific imidazoline-binding 
sites in human medullary membrane preparations, but it has proved more selective 
for cerebral imidazoline receptors than clonidine. This selectivity might 
explain the low incidence of side effects evoked by rilmenidine.
CONCLUSION: Rilmenidine is the first example of a drug exhibiting a favourable 
selectivity between I1-imidazoline receptors and alpha2-adrenergic receptors, 
for example reducing blood pressure but avoiding sedation and mouth dryness.

PMID: 9747903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
