1. J Hypertens. 1998 Apr;16(4):503-17. doi: 10.1097/00004872-199816040-00012.

Relative importance of medullary brain nuclei for the sympatho-inhibitory 
actions of rilmenidine in the anaesthetized rabbit.

Head GA(1), Burke SL.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia. Geoff.Head@baker.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of the rostral ventrolateral medulla 
and the nucleus of the solitary tract in mediating the attenuation of the renal 
sympathetic baroreflex produced by administration of rilmenidine to 
anaesthetized rabbits and to examine the relative contribution of 
alpha2-adrenoceptors and imidazoline receptors at these sites to the 
cardiovascular effects of rilmenidine.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rilmenidine micro-injected into the rostral ventrolateral 
medulla produced hypotension and inhibition of renal sympathetic nerve activity 
with doses an order of magnitude lower than those required in the nucleus 
tractus solitarius. Alpha-methylnoradrenaline, however, was similarly potent at 
producing hypotension when it was injected into the rostral ventrolateral 
medulla or nucleus tractus solitarius but, unlike rilmenidine, did not lower 
renal sympathetic nerve activity when it was injected into the nucleus tractus 
solitarius. The alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist 2-methoxyidazoxan partially 
reversed the hypotension and renal sympathetic nerve activity inhibition due to 
alpha-methylnoradrenaline when it was administered into the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla, whereas the mixed alpha2-adrenoceptor/imidazoline 
receptor antagonists, idazoxan and efaroxan, did not. 2-Methoxyidazoxan, but not 
idazoxan, also reversed the hypotension when alpha-methylnoradrenaline was 
administered into the nucleus tractus solitarius. The hypotension induced by 
rilmenidine in the rostral ventrolateral medulla was completely reversed both by 
2-methoxyidazoxan and by idazoxan, as was the sympathetic inhibition. To assess 
any interaction between the nucleus tractus solitarius and the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla in mediating the baroreflex effects of rilmenidine, we 
injected rilmenidine into the rostral ventrolateral medulla, the nucleus tractus 
solitarius or both nuclei and determined renal baroreflex responses of 
sympathetic nerve activity using drug-induced changes in blood pressure. 
Injection of 0.5 nmol rilmenidine into the rostral ventrolateral medulla reduced 
mean arterial pressure and basal renal sympathetic nerve activity as well as 
renal sympathetic baroreflex range (by 27%) and gain (by 35%). In contrast, 
injection of rilmenidine into the nucleus tractus solitarius had no effect on 
basal renal sympathetic nerve activity and renal sympathetic baroreflex 
parameters. The effect of combined injection was similar to that of 
administration into the rostral ventrolateral medulla alone.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that the rostral ventrolateral medulla, rather than 
the nucleus tractus solitarius, is the major site involved in the hypotension 
and inhibition of the renal sympathetic baroreflex by rilmenidine. Comparison of 
the actions of alpha2-adrenoceptor and imidazoline receptor antagonists on the 
effects of rilmenidine and alpha-methylnoradrenaline suggests that these agents 
are acting at different receptors, presumably imidazoline and 
alpha2-adrenoceptors receptors, respectively, and that both are important in 
lowering sympathetic tone and blood pressure in the rostral ventrolateral 
medulla.

DOI: 10.1097/00004872-199816040-00012
PMID: 9797196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
