1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1998 Oct 15;72(2-3):163-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00101-5.

Relationship between imidazoline and alpha2-adrenoceptors involved in the 
sympatho-inhibitory actions of centrally acting antihypertensive agents.

Head GA(1), Chan CK, Burke SL.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, 
Victoria, Australia. geoff.head@baker.edu.au

Since the first suggestion of the existence of imidazoline receptors, there has 
been a continuing and yet unresolved debate as to their contribution to the 
antihypertensive actions of clonidine-like agents. In this review we bring 
together a number of studies from our laboratory which have examined the 
importance and interdependence of imidazoline receptors and alpha2-adrenoceptors 
in the mechanism of action of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs. Using 
conscious rabbits and a range of imidazoline and specific alpha2-adrenoceptor 
antagonists we have consistently found that second generation agents rilmenidine 
and moxonidine preferentially act via imidazoline receptors but that 
alpha2-adrenoceptors are important for the hypotension produced by clonidine and 
alpha-methyldopa. Despite this difference in receptor mechanism, the hypotension 
produced by all these drugs is dependent on central noradrenergic pathways. In 
other studies using anaesthetised rabbits and direct measures of sympathetic 
nerve activity we confirmed the generally held view that the major site of 
sympatho-inhibitory actions and sympathetic baroreflex effects of centrally 
acting antihypertensive agents is the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM). We 
also found, using microinjection of specific antagonists, that 
alpha2-adrenoceptors in this nucleus appear to be activated as a consequence of 
imidazoline receptor activation. Thus, there appears to be a close relationship 
between imidazoline receptors and alpha2-adrenoceptors located in the RVLM in 
mediating the hypotension and inhibition of renal sympathetic nerve activity. 
Furthermore in recent studies using a noradrenergic neurotoxin microinjected 
into the RVLM we found that this treatment selectively blocked the actions of 
moxonidine but not clonidine, suggesting that I1-imidazoline receptors may be 
located on adrenergic terminals in situ. By contrast, clonidine acts 
predominantly via alpha2-adrenoceptors, perhaps located on cell bodies in the 
nucleus. We conclude that there is indeed a close nexus between 'presynaptic' 
imidazoline receptors on noradrenergic terminals and 'downstream' 
alpha2-adrenoceptors within the RVLM. Our hypothesis brings together opposing 
points of view that the mechanism for hypotension must involve either the 
imidazoline receptor or the alpha2-adrenoceptor. Clearly both are important.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00101-5
PMID: 9851565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
