1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1998 Oct 15;72(2-3):195-204. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00105-2.

Comparison of the baroreceptor-heart rate reflex effects of moxonidine, 
rilmenidine and clonidine in conscious rabbits.

Godwin SJ(1), Tortelli CF, Parkin ML, Head GA.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Baker Medical Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

In 10 conscious rabbits, the baroreceptor-heart rate (HR) reflex effects of 
centrally acting antihypertensive agents with high affinity for imidazoline 
receptors (IRs), moxonidine and rilmenidine, were compared with clonidine which 
acts predominantly via central alpha2-adrenoceptors. Dose regimens were chosen 
to give similar hypotension (-17+/-1 mm Hg) and bradycardia (-27+/-2 b/min) for 
all three agents given into the fourth ventricle. Baroreceptor-HR reflex curves 
were assessed by i.v. drug induced changes in blood pressure. With all 
treatments, the baroreflex curves with both vagal and sympathetic effectors 
intact were shifted to the left, corresponding to the hypotension, and the 
bradycardia plateau was reduced. Rilmenidine and moxonidine also reduced the 
upper plateau such that the curves were shifted parallel down the HR scale with 
no change in the HR range. By contrast, clonidine only decreased the lower 
plateau, and thus increased HR range (+19+/-6%). Moxonidine, but not 
rilmenidine, reduced the baroreflex gain by reducing the curvature. Clonidine 
also decreased curvature but this did not result in a reduction in gain as it 
was offset by the increase in HR range. The gain and range of the cardiac 
sympathetic component, as assessed after vagal blockade, was reduced by 
rilmenidine by 53 and 40% respectively, but was not affected by the other 
agents. The calculated vagal component of the curves showed that all agents 
produced a greater vagal bradycardia in response to a rise in pressure and that 
both rilmenidine and clonidine increased vagal HR range. The present study 
results show that many of the baroreflex effects of clonidine, such as 
facilitating cardiac vagal responses, are shared by the second generation agent 
rilmenidine, suggesting that they are primarily due to alpha2-adrenoceptor 
activation. In addition, the inhibition of the sympathetic component of the 
baroreflex, observed with rilmenidine, and not clonidine suggests that this 
effect may involve IRs. By contrast moxonidine, the most specific agent for I1 
receptors, produces mainly a baroreflex independent inhibition of cardiac 
sympathetic activity with little effect on vagal activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00105-2
PMID: 9851569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
