1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1998 Oct 15;72(2-3):155-62. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00100-3.

Imidazoline receptor mediated natriuresis: central and/or peripheral effect?

Smyth DD(1), Penner SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Canada. dsmyth@ms.umanitoba.ca

The ability of imidazoline agonists, such as moxonidine and rilmenidine, to 
lower blood pressure has been attributed to a central effect resulting in a 
decrease in peripheral sympathetic nerve activity. A similar decrease in 
sympathetic nerve activity to the kidney has been proposed to explain the 
increase in sodium excretion. The observed increase in sodium excretion 
following an intrarenal infusion of moxonidine or rilmenidine suggested the 
existence of a direct renal action. We therefore tested the hypothesis that 
direct renal infusions were acting at a central rather than a peripheral site. 
Thus, interventions which would decrease the natriuretic effects of central 
administered moxonidine would also block the effects of intrarenal administered 
moxonidine. Studies were performed in anesthetized Sprague-Dawley rats (280-320 
g) which had undergone unilateral nephrectomy 7 to 10 days prior to the 
experiment. The interventions utilized resulted in minimal effects on blood 
pressure and creatinine clearance. Intracerebroventricular (icv) or intrarenal 
(ir) administration of moxonidine produced a significant increase in urine flow 
rate and sodium excretion. Intravenous (iv) prazosin was used to block the 
ability of the sympathetic nerves to alter sodium excretion secondary to 
alpha1-adrenoceptor stimulation. Prazosin prevented the natriuresis following 
icv moxonidine but only partially antagonized the effects of ir moxonidine. To 
determine if central imidazoline receptors mediated the effects of moxonidine, 
animals were pretreated with icv idazoxan. Following icv idazoxan, the effects 
of icv moxonidine were blocked, whereas the response to intrarenal moxonidine 
was only partially blocked. Peripheral (iv) administration of idazoxan blocked 
the actions of intrarenal moxonidine but left the response to icv moxonidine 
intact. Finally, chemical sympathectomy with reserpine did not alter the 
response to intrarenal moxonidine suggesting that this effect was independent of 
the sympathetic nervous system. In conclusion, these studies indicate the 
ability of central and peripheral moxonidine to increase urine flow rate through 
sodium excretion at two unique sites of action, one central and the other one 
peripheral, most conceivably within the kidney.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00100-3
PMID: 9851564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
