1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1998 Oct 15;72(2-3):94-7. doi:
10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00093-9.

Does a second generation of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs really 
exist?

Feldman J(1), Greney H, Monassier L, Vonthron C, Bruban V, Dontenwill M, 
Bousquet P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Cardiovasculaire, Faculté de 
Médecine, CNRS-Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

The site of the hypotensive action of imidazoline compounds, such as clonidine, 
was first identified within the rostroventrolateral part of the brainstem: the 
nucleus reticularis lateralis. After that, it was shown that imidazolines and 
related substances reduced blood pressure when applied in this area whereas 
catecholamines were not capable of producing such an effect. These data led us 
to suggest the existence of receptors specific for imidazoline-like compounds 
different from the alpha2-adrenoceptors. Soon after, the existence of 
imidazoline binding sites was reported in the brain and in a variety of 
peripheral tissues including the human kidney. As expected, these specific 
binding sites do not bind the catecholamines. The imidazoline binding sites are 
already subclassified in two groups: the I1-subtype sensitive to clonidine and 
idazoxan, and the I2-subtype, sensitive to idazoxan and nearly insensitive to 
clonidine. Functional studies confirmed that the hypotensive effects of 
clonidine-like drugs involved imidazoline receptors while their most frequent 
side effects only involved alpha2-adrenoceptors. However, recent functional 
evidence suggests that a cross talk between imidazoline receptors and 
alpha2-adrenoceptors is necessary to trigger a hypotensive effect within the 
ventral brainstem. Rilmenidine and Moxonidine are the leader compounds of a new 
class of antihypertensive drugs selective for imidazoline receptors. At 
hypotensive doses, these drugs are devoid of significant sedative effect. 
Rilmenidine evoked hypotension when injected within the nucleus reticularis 
lateralis region; it competed for [3H]-clonidine bound to specific imidazoline 
binding sites in human medullary membrane preparations but proved more selective 
for cerebral imidazoline receptors than clonidine. It is suggested that this 
selectivity might explain the low incidence of their side effects. Additional 
potentially beneficial actions on cardiac arrhythmias or congestive heart 
failure enlarge the therapeutic interest of imidazoline-related drugs. Recent 
binding and functional data throw a new light on the optimal pharmacological 
profile of this second generation of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00093-9
PMID: 9851557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
