1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1998 Oct 15;72(2-3):210-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00107-6.

Increased sympathetic nervous system activity and its therapeutic reduction in 
arterial hypertension, portal hypertension and heart failure.

Esler M(1), Kaye D.

Author information:
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, Melbourne, Australia. 
esler@baker.edu.au

Although the underlying mechanisms no doubt differ, activation of the 
sympathetic nervous system is an important pathophysiological feature in primary 
arterial hypertension, in portal hypertension accompanying hepatic cirrhosis, 
and in heart failure, and is a logical therapeutic target for centrally acting 
sympathetic nervous system suppressant drugs. Portal hypertension: The 
sympathetic outflows to skeletal muscle vasculature, the heart, the kidneys and 
to the hepatomesenteric circulation are stimulated in patients with alcoholic 
cirrhosis of the liver, perhaps as a reflex response to the vasodilatation and 
vascular shunting present. Acute dosing with clonidine produces dose dependent 
reduction in noradrenaline spillover from visceral organs and reduction in 
hepatic vein wedge pressure, with preservation of hepatic blood flow and 
negligible fall in arterial pressure. These findings indicate the clinical 
potential of drugs such as clonidine, moxonidine and rilmenidine for chronically 
lowering portal venous pressure in cirrhosis. Arterial hypertension: Activation 
of the sympathetic outflow to the heart, kidneys and skeletal muscle vasculature 
is commonly present in younger (< 45 years) patients with essential 
hypertension. The sympathetic stimulation appears to have adverse consequences 
in hypertensive patients beyond blood pressure elevation. Neural 
vasoconstriction in skeletal muscle has metabolic effects by impairing glucose 
delivery, which is a basis for insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia. Within 
the heart a trophic effect of sympathetic activation on cardiac growth, 
contributing to the development of left ventricular hypertrophy, and an 
arrhythmogenic effect are also likely. Cardiac failure: The cardiac sympathetic 
nerves are preferentially stimulated in severe heart failure, with 
norepinephrine release from the failing heart at rest being increased as much as 
50-fold, similar to the level seen in healthy people during near maximum 
exercise. This preferential activation of the cardiac sympathetic outflow 
contributes to arrhythmogenesis and possibly to progression of the heart 
failure, and has been directly linked to mortality; a high rate of spillover of 
noradrenaline from the heart is a strong, independent predictor of poor 
prognosis in severe cardiac failure. The mechanisms underlying sympathetic 
nervous stimulation are not entirely clear. Increased intracardiac diastolic 
pressure seems to be one peripheral signal, and increased forebrain 
norepinephrine turnover an important central mechanism. Following the 
demonstration of the beneficial effect of the beta-adrenergic blocker, 
carvedilol, and with second generation centrally acting sympathetic suppressants 
now under clinical investigation, elucidation of the abnormalities in central 
nervous control of sympathetic outflow in heart failure has become clinically 
relevant.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1838(98)00107-6
PMID: 9851571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
