1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999 Feb;288(2):455-62.

Ethanol counteraction of I1-imidazoline but not alpha-2 adrenergic 
receptor-mediated reduction in vascular resistance in conscious spontaneously 
hypertensive rats.

El-Mas MM(1), Abdel-Rahman AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, East Carolina University, 
Greenville, North Carolina 27858, USA.

Our recent findings have shown that ethanol selectively counteracts decreases in 
blood pressure (BP) evoked via activation of central I1-imidazoline receptors 
but not alpha-2 adrenoceptors in conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats 
(SHRs). This study investigated the role of sympathetic activity, cardiac output 
and total peripheral resistance (TPR) in the differential effect of ethanol on 
centrally mediated hypotension. Changes in plasma norepinephrine (NE), as index 
of sympathetic activity, BP, heart rate, cardiac index, stroke volume, and TPR 
elicited by rilmenidine or alpha-methylnorepinephrine (selective I1 and alpha-2 
receptor agonists, respectively) and subsequent ethanol (0.5 or 1 g/kg) or 
saline, were evaluated in conscious SHRs. Intracisternal rilmenidine (25 microg) 
or alpha-methylnorepinephrine (alpha-MNE; 4 microg) elicited similar decreases 
in BP, TPR, and plasma NE, but cardiac index was not changed. Ethanol (0.5 g/kg 
i.v.) had no effect on hemodynamic responses to rilmenidine or alpha-MNE. The 
higher dose (1 g/kg i.v.) of ethanol counteracted the hypotensive response to 
rilmenidine and significantly (P <.05) elevated TPR and plasma NE. In contrast, 
ethanol (1 g/kg) had no effect on the hypotensive responses to alpha-MNE but 
significantly (P <.05) elevated plasma NE. However, this increase in NE was 
approximately one third of the increase evoked by ethanol when given after 
rilmenidine. These findings suggest that the selective counteraction by ethanol 
of the hypotension evoked via activation of central I1 but not alpha-2 receptors 
may relate, at least in part, to its greater ability to reverse the 
sympathoinhibition and the associated decrease in vascular resistance mediated 
by I1 receptors.

PMID: 9918545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
